Chapter I. The beginning of things.


They were not railway children to begin with. I don't suppose they had
ever thought about railways except as a means of getting to Maskelyne
and Cook's, the Pantomime, Zoological Gardens, and Madame Tussaud's.
They were just ordinary suburban children, and they lived with their
Father and Mother in an ordinary red-brick-fronted villa, with coloured
glass in the front door, a tiled passage that was called a hall, a
bath-room with hot and cold water, electric bells, French windows, and
a good deal of white paint, and 'every modern convenience', as the
house-agents say.

There were three of them. Roberta was the eldest. Of course, Mothers
never have favourites, but if their Mother HAD had a favourite, it might
have been Roberta. Next came Peter, who wished to be an Engineer when he
grew up; and the youngest was Phyllis, who meant extremely well.

Mother did not spend all her time in paying dull calls to dull ladies,
and sitting dully at home waiting for dull ladies to pay calls to her.
She was almost always there, ready to play with the children, and read
to them, and help them to do their home-lessons. Besides this she used
to write stories for them while they were at school, and read them
aloud after tea, and she always made up funny pieces of poetry for their
birthdays and for other great occasions, such as the christening of the
new kittens, or the refurnishing of the doll's house, or the time when
they were getting over the mumps.

These three lucky children always had everything they needed: pretty
clothes, good fires, a lovely nursery with heaps of toys, and a Mother
Goose wall-paper. They had a kind and merry nursemaid, and a dog who was
called James, and who was their very own. They also had a Father who was
just perfect--never cross, never unjust, and always ready for a game--at
least, if at any time he was NOT ready, he always had an excellent
reason for it, and explained the reason to the children so interestingly
and funnily that they felt sure he couldn't help himself.

You will think that they ought to have been very happy. And so they
were, but they did not know HOW happy till the pretty life in the Red
Villa was over and done with, and they had to live a very different life
indeed.

The dreadful change came quite suddenly.

Peter had a birthday--his tenth. Among his other presents was a model
engine more perfect than you could ever have dreamed of. The other
presents were full of charm, but the Engine was fuller of charm than any
of the others were.

Its charm lasted in its full perfection for exactly three days. Then,
owing either to Peter's inexperience or Phyllis's good intentions, which
had been rather pressing, or to some other cause, the Engine suddenly
went off with a bang. James was so frightened that he went out and did
not come back all day. All the Noah's Ark people who were in the tender
were broken to bits, but nothing else was hurt except the poor little
engine and the feelings of Peter. The others said he cried over it--but
of course boys of ten do not cry, however terrible the tragedies may be
which darken their lot. He said that his eyes were red because he had a
cold. This turned out to be true, though Peter did not know it was when
he said it, the next day he had to go to bed and stay there. Mother
began to be afraid that he might be sickening for measles, when suddenly
he sat up in bed and said:

“I hate gruel--I hate barley water--I hate bread and milk. I want to get
up and have something REAL to eat.”

“What would you like?” Mother asked.

“A pigeon-pie,” said Peter, eagerly, “a large pigeon-pie. A very large
one.”

So Mother asked the Cook to make a large pigeon-pie. The pie was made.
And when the pie was made, it was cooked. And when it was cooked, Peter
ate some of it. After that his cold was better. Mother made a piece of
poetry to amuse him while the pie was being made. It began by saying
what an unfortunate but worthy boy Peter was, then it went on:

      He had an engine that he loved
        With all his heart and soul,
      And if he had a wish on earth
        It was to keep it whole.

      One day--my friends, prepare your minds;
        I'm coming to the worst--
      Quite suddenly a screw went mad,
        And then the boiler burst!

      With gloomy face he picked it up
        And took it to his Mother,
      Though even he could not suppose
        That she could make another;

      For those who perished on the line
        He did not seem to care,
      His engine being more to him
        Than all the people there.

      And now you see the reason why
        Our Peter has been ill:
      He soothes his soul with pigeon-pie
        His gnawing grief to kill.

      He wraps himself in blankets warm
        And sleeps in bed till late,
      Determined thus to overcome
        His miserable fate.

      And if his eyes are rather red,
        His cold must just excuse it:
      Offer him pie; you may be sure
        He never will refuse it.

Father had been away in the country for three or four days. All Peter's
hopes for the curing of his afflicted Engine were now fixed on his
Father, for Father was most wonderfully clever with his fingers. He
could mend all sorts of things. He had often acted as veterinary surgeon
to the wooden rocking-horse; once he had saved its life when all human
aid was despaired of, and the poor creature was given up for lost, and
even the carpenter said he didn't see his way to do anything. And it was
Father who mended the doll's cradle when no one else could; and with a
little glue and some bits of wood and a pen-knife made all the Noah's
Ark beasts as strong on their pins as ever they were, if not stronger.

Peter, with heroic unselfishness, did not say anything about his Engine
till after Father had had his dinner and his after-dinner cigar. The
unselfishness was Mother's idea--but it was Peter who carried it out.
And needed a good deal of patience, too.

At last Mother said to Father, “Now, dear, if you're quite rested, and
quite comfy, we want to tell you about the great railway accident, and
ask your advice.”

“All right,” said Father, “fire away!”

So then Peter told the sad tale, and fetched what was left of the
Engine.

“Hum,” said Father, when he had looked the Engine over very carefully.

The children held their breaths.

“Is there NO hope?” said Peter, in a low, unsteady voice.

“Hope? Rather! Tons of it,” said Father, cheerfully; “but it'll want
something besides hope--a bit of brazing say, or some solder, and a new
valve. I think we'd better keep it for a rainy day. In other words, I'll
give up Saturday afternoon to it, and you shall all help me.”

“CAN girls help to mend engines?” Peter asked doubtfully.

“Of course they can. Girls are just as clever as boys, and don't you
forget it! How would you like to be an engine-driver, Phil?”

“My face would be always dirty, wouldn't it?” said Phyllis, in
unenthusiastic tones, “and I expect I should break something.”

“I should just love it,” said Roberta--“do you think I could when I'm
grown up, Daddy? Or even a stoker?”

“You mean a fireman,” said Daddy, pulling and twisting at the engine.
“Well, if you still wish it, when you're grown up, we'll see about
making you a fire-woman. I remember when I was a boy--”

Just then there was a knock at the front door.

“Who on earth!” said Father. “An Englishman's house is his castle, of
course, but I do wish they built semi-detached villas with moats and
drawbridges.”

Ruth--she was the parlour-maid and had red hair--came in and said that
two gentlemen wanted to see the master.

“I've shown them into the Library, Sir,” said she.

“I expect it's the subscription to the Vicar's testimonial,” said
Mother, “or else it's the choir holiday fund. Get rid of them quickly,
dear. It does break up an evening so, and it's nearly the children's
bedtime.”

But Father did not seem to be able to get rid of the gentlemen at all
quickly.

“I wish we HAD got a moat and drawbridge,” said Roberta; “then, when we
didn't want people, we could just pull up the drawbridge and no one else
could get in. I expect Father will have forgotten about when he was a
boy if they stay much longer.”

Mother tried to make the time pass by telling them a new fairy story
about a Princess with green eyes, but it was difficult because they
could hear the voices of Father and the gentlemen in the Library, and
Father's voice sounded louder and different to the voice he generally
used to people who came about testimonials and holiday funds.

Then the Library bell rang, and everyone heaved a breath of relief.

“They're going now,” said Phyllis; “he's rung to have them shown out.”

But instead of showing anybody out, Ruth showed herself in, and she
looked queer, the children thought.

“Please'm,” she said, “the Master wants you to just step into the study.
He looks like the dead, mum; I think he's had bad news. You'd best
prepare yourself for the worst, 'm--p'raps it's a death in the family or
a bank busted or--”

“That'll do, Ruth,” said Mother gently; “you can go.”

Then Mother went into the Library. There was more talking. Then the bell
rang again, and Ruth fetched a cab. The children heard boots go out and
down the steps. The cab drove away, and the front door shut. Then Mother
came in. Her dear face was as white as her lace collar, and her eyes
looked very big and shining. Her mouth looked like just a line of pale
red--her lips were thin and not their proper shape at all.

“It's bedtime,” she said. “Ruth will put you to bed.”

“But you promised we should sit up late tonight because Father's come
home,” said Phyllis.

“Father's been called away--on business,” said Mother. “Come, darlings,
go at once.”

They kissed her and went. Roberta lingered to give Mother an extra hug
and to whisper:

“It wasn't bad news, Mammy, was it? Is anyone dead--or--”

“Nobody's dead--no,” said Mother, and she almost seemed to push Roberta
away. “I can't tell you anything tonight, my pet. Go, dear, go NOW.”

So Roberta went.

Ruth brushed the girls' hair and helped them to undress. (Mother almost
always did this herself.) When she had turned down the gas and left them
she found Peter, still dressed, waiting on the stairs.

“I say, Ruth, what's up?” he asked.

“Don't ask me no questions and I won't tell you no lies,” the red-headed
Ruth replied. “You'll know soon enough.”

Late that night Mother came up and kissed all three children as they
lay asleep. But Roberta was the only one whom the kiss woke, and she lay
mousey-still, and said nothing.

“If Mother doesn't want us to know she's been crying,” she said to
herself as she heard through the dark the catching of her Mother's
breath, “we WON'T know it. That's all.”

When they came down to breakfast the next morning, Mother had already
gone out.

“To London,” Ruth said, and left them to their breakfast.

“There's something awful the matter,” said Peter, breaking his egg.
“Ruth told me last night we should know soon enough.”

“Did you ASK her?” said Roberta, with scorn.

“Yes, I did!” said Peter, angrily. “If you could go to bed without
caring whether Mother was worried or not, I couldn't. So there.”

“I don't think we ought to ask the servants things Mother doesn't tell
us,” said Roberta.

“That's right, Miss Goody-goody,” said Peter, “preach away.”

“I'M not goody,” said Phyllis, “but I think Bobbie's right this time.”

“Of course. She always is. In her own opinion,” said Peter.

“Oh, DON'T!” cried Roberta, putting down her egg-spoon; “don't let's be
horrid to each other. I'm sure some dire calamity is happening. Don't
let's make it worse!”

“Who began, I should like to know?” said Peter.

Roberta made an effort, and answered:--

“I did, I suppose, but--”

“Well, then,” said Peter, triumphantly. But before he went to school he
thumped his sister between the shoulders and told her to cheer up.

The children came home to one o'clock dinner, but Mother was not there.
And she was not there at tea-time.

It was nearly seven before she came in, looking so ill and tired that
the children felt they could not ask her any questions. She sank into an
arm-chair. Phyllis took the long pins out of her hat, while Roberta took
off her gloves, and Peter unfastened her walking-shoes and fetched her
soft velvety slippers for her.

When she had had a cup of tea, and Roberta had put eau-de-Cologne on her
poor head that ached, Mother said:--

“Now, my darlings, I want to tell you something. Those men last night
did bring very bad news, and Father will be away for some time. I am
very worried about it, and I want you all to help me, and not to make
things harder for me.”

“As if we would!” said Roberta, holding Mother's hand against her face.

“You can help me very much,” said Mother, “by being good and happy
and not quarrelling when I'm away”--Roberta and Peter exchanged guilty
glances--“for I shall have to be away a good deal.”

“We won't quarrel. Indeed we won't,” said everybody. And meant it, too.

“Then,” Mother went on, “I want you not to ask me any questions about
this trouble; and not to ask anybody else any questions.”

Peter cringed and shuffled his boots on the carpet.

“You'll promise this, too, won't you?” said Mother.

“I did ask Ruth,” said Peter, suddenly. “I'm very sorry, but I did.”

“And what did she say?”

“She said I should know soon enough.”

“It isn't necessary for you to know anything about it,” said Mother;
“it's about business, and you never do understand business, do you?”

“No,” said Roberta; “is it something to do with Government?” For Father
was in a Government Office.

“Yes,” said Mother. “Now it's bed-time, my darlings. And don't YOU
worry. It'll all come right in the end.”

“Then don't YOU worry either, Mother,” said Phyllis, “and we'll all be
as good as gold.”

Mother sighed and kissed them.

“We'll begin being good the first thing tomorrow morning,” said Peter,
as they went upstairs.

“Why not NOW?” said Roberta.

“There's nothing to be good ABOUT now, silly,” said Peter.

“We might begin to try to FEEL good,” said Phyllis, “and not call
names.”

“Who's calling names?” said Peter. “Bobbie knows right enough that when
I say 'silly', it's just the same as if I said Bobbie.”

“WELL,” said Roberta.

“No, I don't mean what you mean. I mean it's just a--what is it Father
calls it?--a germ of endearment! Good night.”

The girls folded up their clothes with more than usual neatness--which
was the only way of being good that they could think of.

“I say,” said Phyllis, smoothing out her pinafore, “you used to say
it was so dull--nothing happening, like in books. Now something HAS
happened.”

“I never wanted things to happen to make Mother unhappy,” said Roberta.
“Everything's perfectly horrid.”

Everything continued to be perfectly horrid for some weeks.

Mother was nearly always out. Meals were dull and dirty. The
between-maid was sent away, and Aunt Emma came on a visit. Aunt Emma was
much older than Mother. She was going abroad to be a governess. She
was very busy getting her clothes ready, and they were very ugly, dingy
clothes, and she had them always littering about, and the sewing-machine
seemed to whir--on and on all day and most of the night. Aunt Emma
believed in keeping children in their proper places. And they more than
returned the compliment. Their idea of Aunt Emma's proper place was
anywhere where they were not. So they saw very little of her. They
preferred the company of the servants, who were more amusing. Cook,
if in a good temper, could sing comic songs, and the housemaid, if she
happened not to be offended with you, could imitate a hen that has laid
an egg, a bottle of champagne being opened, and could mew like two cats
fighting. The servants never told the children what the bad news was
that the gentlemen had brought to Father. But they kept hinting
that they could tell a great deal if they chose--and this was not
comfortable.

One day when Peter had made a booby trap over the bath-room door, and
it had acted beautifully as Ruth passed through, that red-haired
parlour-maid caught him and boxed his ears.

“You'll come to a bad end,” she said furiously, “you nasty little limb,
you! If you don't mend your ways, you'll go where your precious Father's
gone, so I tell you straight!”

Roberta repeated this to her Mother, and next day Ruth was sent away.

Then came the time when Mother came home and went to bed and stayed
there two days and the Doctor came, and the children crept wretchedly
about the house and wondered if the world was coming to an end.

Mother came down one morning to breakfast, very pale and with lines
on her face that used not to be there. And she smiled, as well as she
could, and said:--

“Now, my pets, everything is settled. We're going to leave this house,
and go and live in the country. Such a ducky dear little white house. I
know you'll love it.”

A whirling week of packing followed--not just packing clothes, like when
you go to the seaside, but packing chairs and tables, covering their
tops with sacking and their legs with straw.

All sorts of things were packed that you don't pack when you go to
the seaside. Crockery, blankets, candlesticks, carpets, bedsteads,
saucepans, and even fenders and fire-irons.

The house was like a furniture warehouse. I think the children enjoyed
it very much. Mother was very busy, but not too busy now to talk to
them, and read to them, and even to make a bit of poetry for Phyllis to
cheer her up when she fell down with a screwdriver and ran it into her
hand.

“Aren't you going to pack this, Mother?” Roberta asked, pointing to the
beautiful cabinet inlaid with red turtleshell and brass.

“We can't take everything,” said Mother.

“But we seem to be taking all the ugly things,” said Roberta.

“We're taking the useful ones,” said Mother; “we've got to play at being
Poor for a bit, my chickabiddy.”

When all the ugly useful things had been packed up and taken away in a
van by men in green-baize aprons, the two girls and Mother and Aunt Emma
slept in the two spare rooms where the furniture was all pretty. All
their beds had gone. A bed was made up for Peter on the drawing-room
sofa.

“I say, this is larks,” he said, wriggling joyously, as Mother tucked
him up. “I do like moving! I wish we moved once a month.”

Mother laughed.

“I don't!” she said. “Good night, Peterkin.”

As she turned away Roberta saw her face. She never forgot it.

“Oh, Mother,” she whispered all to herself as she got into bed, “how
brave you are! How I love you! Fancy being brave enough to laugh when
you're feeling like THAT!”

Next day boxes were filled, and boxes and more boxes; and then late in
the afternoon a cab came to take them to the station.

Aunt Emma saw them off. They felt that THEY were seeing HER off, and
they were glad of it.

“But, oh, those poor little foreign children that she's going to
governess!” whispered Phyllis. “I wouldn't be them for anything!”

At first they enjoyed looking out of the window, but when it grew dusk
they grew sleepier and sleepier, and no one knew how long they had been
in the train when they were roused by Mother's shaking them gently and
saying:--

“Wake up, dears. We're there.”

They woke up, cold and melancholy, and stood shivering on the draughty
platform while the baggage was taken out of the train. Then the engine,
puffing and blowing, set to work again, and dragged the train away. The
children watched the tail-lights of the guard's van disappear into the
darkness.

This was the first train the children saw on that railway which was in
time to become so very dear to them. They did not guess then how they
would grow to love the railway, and how soon it would become the centre
of their new life, nor what wonders and changes it would bring to them.
They only shivered and sneezed and hoped the walk to the new house would
not be long. Peter's nose was colder than he ever remembered it to have
been before. Roberta's hat was crooked, and the elastic seemed tighter
than usual. Phyllis's shoe-laces had come undone.

“Come,” said Mother, “we've got to walk. There aren't any cabs here.”

The walk was dark and muddy. The children stumbled a little on the rough
road, and once Phyllis absently fell into a puddle, and was picked up
damp and unhappy. There were no gas-lamps on the road, and the road was
uphill. The cart went at a foot's pace, and they followed the gritty
crunch of its wheels. As their eyes got used to the darkness, they could
see the mound of boxes swaying dimly in front of them.

A long gate had to be opened for the cart to pass through, and after
that the road seemed to go across fields--and now it went down hill.
Presently a great dark lumpish thing showed over to the right.

“There's the house,” said Mother. “I wonder why she's shut the
shutters.”

“Who's SHE?” asked Roberta.

“The woman I engaged to clean the place, and put the furniture straight
and get supper.”

There was a low wall, and trees inside.

“That's the garden,” said Mother.

“It looks more like a dripping-pan full of black cabbages,” said Peter.

The cart went on along by the garden wall, and round to the back of the
house, and here it clattered into a cobble-stoned yard and stopped at
the back door.

There was no light in any of the windows.

Everyone hammered at the door, but no one came.

The man who drove the cart said he expected Mrs. Viney had gone home.

“You see your train was that late,” said he.

“But she's got the key,” said Mother. “What are we to do?”

“Oh, she'll have left that under the doorstep,” said the cart man;
“folks do hereabouts.” He took the lantern off his cart and stooped.

“Ay, here it is, right enough,” he said.

He unlocked the door and went in and set his lantern on the table.

“Got e'er a candle?” said he.

“I don't know where anything is.” Mother spoke rather less cheerfully
than usual.

He struck a match. There was a candle on the table, and he lighted it.
By its thin little glimmer the children saw a large bare kitchen with
a stone floor. There were no curtains, no hearth-rug. The kitchen
table from home stood in the middle of the room. The chairs were in one
corner, and the pots, pans, brooms, and crockery in another. There was
no fire, and the black grate showed cold, dead ashes.

As the cart man turned to go out after he had brought in the boxes,
there was a rustling, scampering sound that seemed to come from inside
the walls of the house.

“Oh, what's that?” cried the girls.

“It's only the rats,” said the cart man. And he went away and shut the
door, and the sudden draught of it blew out the candle.

“Oh, dear,” said Phyllis, “I wish we hadn't come!” and she knocked a
chair over.

“ONLY the rats!” said Peter, in the dark.



Chapter II. Peter's coal-mine.


“What fun!” said Mother, in the dark, feeling for the matches on the
table. “How frightened the poor mice were--I don't believe they were
rats at all.”

She struck a match and relighted the candle and everyone looked at each
other by its winky, blinky light.

“Well,” she said, “you've often wanted something to happen and now it
has. This is quite an adventure, isn't it? I told Mrs. Viney to get us
some bread and butter, and meat and things, and to have supper ready. I
suppose she's laid it in the dining-room. So let's go and see.”

The dining-room opened out of the kitchen. It looked much darker than
the kitchen when they went in with the one candle. Because the kitchen
was whitewashed, but the dining-room was dark wood from floor to
ceiling, and across the ceiling there were heavy black beams. There was
a muddled maze of dusty furniture--the breakfast-room furniture from
the old home where they had lived all their lives. It seemed a very long
time ago, and a very long way off.

There was the table certainly, and there were chairs, but there was no
supper.

“Let's look in the other rooms,” said Mother; and they looked. And in
each room was the same kind of blundering half-arrangement of furniture,
and fire-irons and crockery, and all sorts of odd things on the floor,
but there was nothing to eat; even in the pantry there were only a rusty
cake-tin and a broken plate with whitening mixed in it.

“What a horrid old woman!” said Mother; “she's just walked off with the
money and not got us anything to eat at all.”

“Then shan't we have any supper at all?” asked Phyllis, dismayed,
stepping back on to a soap-dish that cracked responsively.

“Oh, yes,” said Mother, “only it'll mean unpacking one of those big
cases that we put in the cellar. Phil, do mind where you're walking to,
there's a dear. Peter, hold the light.”

The cellar door opened out of the kitchen. There were five wooden steps
leading down. It wasn't a proper cellar at all, the children thought,
because its ceiling went up as high as the kitchen's. A bacon-rack hung
under its ceiling. There was wood in it, and coal. Also the big cases.

Peter held the candle, all on one side, while Mother tried to open the
great packing-case. It was very securely nailed down.

“Where's the hammer?” asked Peter.

“That's just it,” said Mother. “I'm afraid it's inside the box. But
there's a coal-shovel--and there's the kitchen poker.”

And with these she tried to get the case open.

“Let me do it,” said Peter, thinking he could do it better himself.
Everyone thinks this when he sees another person stirring a fire, or
opening a box, or untying a knot in a bit of string.

“You'll hurt your hands, Mammy,” said Roberta; “let me.”

“I wish Father was here,” said Phyllis; “he'd get it open in two shakes.
What are you kicking me for, Bobbie?”

“I wasn't,” said Roberta.

Just then the first of the long nails in the packing-case began to come
out with a scrunch. Then a lath was raised and then another, till all
four stood up with the long nails in them shining fiercely like iron
teeth in the candle-light.

“Hooray!” said Mother; “here are some candles--the very first thing! You
girls go and light them. You'll find some saucers and things. Just drop
a little candle-grease in the saucer and stick the candle upright in
it.”

“How many shall we light?”

“As many as ever you like,” said Mother, gaily. “The great thing is
to be cheerful. Nobody can be cheerful in the dark except owls and
dormice.”

So the girls lighted candles. The head of the first match flew off and
stuck to Phyllis's finger; but, as Roberta said, it was only a little
burn, and she might have had to be a Roman martyr and be burned whole if
she had happened to live in the days when those things were fashionable.

Then, when the dining-room was lighted by fourteen candles, Roberta
fetched coal and wood and lighted a fire.

“It's very cold for May,” she said, feeling what a grown-up thing it was
to say.

The fire-light and the candle-light made the dining-room look very
different, for now you could see that the dark walls were of wood,
carved here and there into little wreaths and loops.

The girls hastily 'tidied' the room, which meant putting the chairs
against the wall, and piling all the odds and ends into a corner and
partly hiding them with the big leather arm-chair that Father used to
sit in after dinner.

“Bravo!” cried Mother, coming in with a tray full of things. “This is
something like! I'll just get a tablecloth and then--”

The tablecloth was in a box with a proper lock that was opened with a
key and not with a shovel, and when the cloth was spread on the table, a
real feast was laid out on it.

Everyone was very, very tired, but everyone cheered up at the sight of
the funny and delightful supper. There were biscuits, the Marie and the
plain kind, sardines, preserved ginger, cooking raisins, and candied
peel and marmalade.

“What a good thing Aunt Emma packed up all the odds and ends out of the
Store cupboard,” said Mother. “Now, Phil, DON'T put the marmalade spoon
in among the sardines.”

“No, I won't, Mother,” said Phyllis, and put it down among the Marie
biscuits.

“Let's drink Aunt Emma's health,” said Roberta, suddenly; “what should
we have done if she hadn't packed up these things? Here's to Aunt Emma!”

And the toast was drunk in ginger wine and water, out of
willow-patterned tea-cups, because the glasses couldn't be found.

They all felt that they had been a little hard on Aunt Emma. She wasn't
a nice cuddly person like Mother, but after all it was she who had
thought of packing up the odds and ends of things to eat.

It was Aunt Emma, too, who had aired all the sheets ready; and the men
who had moved the furniture had put the bedsteads together, so the beds
were soon made.

“Good night, chickies,” said Mother. “I'm sure there aren't any rats.
But I'll leave my door open, and then if a mouse comes, you need only
scream, and I'll come and tell it exactly what I think of it.”

Then she went to her own room. Roberta woke to hear the little
travelling clock chime two. It sounded like a church clock ever so far
away, she always thought. And she heard, too, Mother still moving about
in her room.

Next morning Roberta woke Phyllis by pulling her hair gently, but quite
enough for her purpose.

“Wassermarrer?” asked Phyllis, still almost wholly asleep.

“Wake up! wake up!” said Roberta. “We're in the new house--don't you
remember? No servants or anything. Let's get up and begin to be useful.
We'll just creep down mouse-quietly, and have everything beautiful
before Mother gets up. I've woke Peter. He'll be dressed as soon as we
are.”

So they dressed quietly and quickly. Of course, there was no water in
their room, so when they got down they washed as much as they thought
was necessary under the spout of the pump in the yard. One pumped and
the other washed. It was splashy but interesting.

“It's much more fun than basin washing,” said Roberta. “How sparkly
the weeds are between the stones, and the moss on the roof--oh, and the
flowers!”

The roof of the back kitchen sloped down quite low. It was made
of thatch and it had moss on it, and house-leeks and stonecrop and
wallflowers, and even a clump of purple flag-flowers, at the far corner.

“This is far, far, far and away prettier than Edgecombe Villa,” said
Phyllis. “I wonder what the garden's like.”

“We mustn't think of the garden yet,” said Roberta, with earnest energy.
“Let's go in and begin to work.”

They lighted the fire and put the kettle on, and they arranged the
crockery for breakfast; they could not find all the right things, but
a glass ash-tray made an excellent salt-cellar, and a newish baking-tin
seemed as if it would do to put bread on, if they had any.

When there seemed to be nothing more that they could do, they went out
again into the fresh bright morning.

“We'll go into the garden now,” said Peter. But somehow they couldn't
find the garden. They went round the house and round the house. The yard
occupied the back, and across it were stables and outbuildings. On the
other three sides the house stood simply in a field, without a yard
of garden to divide it from the short smooth turf. And yet they had
certainly seen the garden wall the night before.

It was a hilly country. Down below they could see the line of the
railway, and the black yawning mouth of a tunnel. The station was out of
sight. There was a great bridge with tall arches running across one end
of the valley.

“Never mind the garden,” said Peter; “let's go down and look at the
railway. There might be trains passing.”

“We can see them from here,” said Roberta, slowly; “let's sit down a
bit.”

So they all sat down on a great flat grey stone that had pushed itself
up out of the grass; it was one of many that lay about on the hillside,
and when Mother came out to look for them at eight o'clock, she found
them deeply asleep in a contented, sun-warmed bunch.

They had made an excellent fire, and had set the kettle on it at about
half-past five. So that by eight the fire had been out for some time,
the water had all boiled away, and the bottom was burned out of the
kettle. Also they had not thought of washing the crockery before they
set the table.

“But it doesn't matter--the cups and saucers, I mean,” said Mother.
“Because I've found another room--I'd quite forgotten there was one. And
it's magic! And I've boiled the water for tea in a saucepan.”

The forgotten room opened out of the kitchen. In the agitation and half
darkness the night before its door had been mistaken for a cupboard's.
It was a little square room, and on its table, all nicely set out, was a
joint of cold roast beef, with bread, butter, cheese, and a pie.

“Pie for breakfast!” cried Peter; “how perfectly ripping!”

“It isn't pigeon-pie,” said Mother; “it's only apple. Well, this is the
supper we ought to have had last night. And there was a note from Mrs.
Viney. Her son-in-law has broken his arm, and she had to get home early.
She's coming this morning at ten.”

That was a wonderful breakfast. It is unusual to begin the day with
cold apple pie, but the children all said they would rather have it than
meat.

“You see it's more like dinner than breakfast to us,” said Peter,
passing his plate for more, “because we were up so early.”

The day passed in helping Mother to unpack and arrange things. Six small
legs quite ached with running about while their owners carried clothes
and crockery and all sorts of things to their proper places. It was not
till quite late in the afternoon that Mother said:--

“There! That'll do for to-day. I'll lie down for an hour, so as to be as
fresh as a lark by supper-time.”

Then they all looked at each other. Each of the three expressive
countenances expressed the same thought. That thought was double,
and consisted, like the bits of information in the Child's Guide to
Knowledge, of a question and an answer.

Q. Where shall we go?

A. To the railway.

So to the railway they went, and as soon as they started for the railway
they saw where the garden had hidden itself. It was right behind the
stables, and it had a high wall all round.

“Oh, never mind about the garden now!” cried Peter. “Mother told me
this morning where it was. It'll keep till to-morrow. Let's get to the
railway.”

The way to the railway was all down hill over smooth, short turf with
here and there furze bushes and grey and yellow rocks sticking out like
candied peel from the top of a cake.

The way ended in a steep run and a wooden fence--and there was the
railway with the shining metals and the telegraph wires and posts and
signals.

They all climbed on to the top of the fence, and then suddenly there was
a rumbling sound that made them look along the line to the right, where
the dark mouth of a tunnel opened itself in the face of a rocky cliff;
next moment a train had rushed out of the tunnel with a shriek and
a snort, and had slid noisily past them. They felt the rush of its
passing, and the pebbles on the line jumped and rattled under it as it
went by.

“Oh!” said Roberta, drawing a long breath; “it was like a great dragon
tearing by. Did you feel it fan us with its hot wings?”

“I suppose a dragon's lair might look very like that tunnel from the
outside,” said Phyllis.

But Peter said:--

“I never thought we should ever get as near to a train as this. It's the
most ripping sport!”

“Better than toy-engines, isn't it?” said Roberta.

(I am tired of calling Roberta by her name. I don't see why I should.
No one else did. Everyone else called her Bobbie, and I don't see why I
shouldn't.)

“I don't know; it's different,” said Peter. “It seems so odd to see ALL
of a train. It's awfully tall, isn't it?”

“We've always seen them cut in half by platforms,” said Phyllis.

“I wonder if that train was going to London,” Bobbie said. “London's
where Father is.”

“Let's go down to the station and find out,” said Peter.

So they went.

They walked along the edge of the line, and heard the telegraph wires
humming over their heads. When you are in the train, it seems such a
little way between post and post, and one after another the posts seem
to catch up the wires almost more quickly than you can count them. But
when you have to walk, the posts seem few and far between.

But the children got to the station at last.

Never before had any of them been at a station, except for the purpose
of catching trains--or perhaps waiting for them--and always with
grown-ups in attendance, grown-ups who were not themselves interested in
stations, except as places from which they wished to get away.

Never before had they passed close enough to a signal-box to be able to
notice the wires, and to hear the mysterious 'ping, ping,' followed by
the strong, firm clicking of machinery.

The very sleepers on which the rails lay were a delightful path to
travel by--just far enough apart to serve as the stepping-stones in a
game of foaming torrents hastily organised by Bobbie.

Then to arrive at the station, not through the booking office, but in
a freebooting sort of way by the sloping end of the platform. This in
itself was joy.

Joy, too, it was to peep into the porters' room, where the lamps are,
and the Railway almanac on the wall, and one porter half asleep behind a
paper.

There were a great many crossing lines at the station; some of them just
ran into a yard and stopped short, as though they were tired of business
and meant to retire for good. Trucks stood on the rails here, and on one
side was a great heap of coal--not a loose heap, such as you see in your
coal cellar, but a sort of solid building of coals with large square
blocks of coal outside used just as though they were bricks, and built
up till the heap looked like the picture of the Cities of the Plain in
'Bible Stories for Infants.' There was a line of whitewash near the top
of the coaly wall.

When presently the Porter lounged out of his room at the twice-repeated
tingling thrill of a gong over the station door, Peter said, “How do you
do?” in his best manner, and hastened to ask what the white mark was on
the coal for.

“To mark how much coal there be,” said the Porter, “so as we'll know if
anyone nicks it. So don't you go off with none in your pockets, young
gentleman!”

This seemed, at the time but a merry jest, and Peter felt at once that
the Porter was a friendly sort with no nonsense about him. But later the
words came back to Peter with a new meaning.

Have you ever gone into a farmhouse kitchen on a baking day, and seen
the great crock of dough set by the fire to rise? If you have, and if
you were at that time still young enough to be interested in everything
you saw, you will remember that you found yourself quite unable to
resist the temptation to poke your finger into the soft round of dough
that curved inside the pan like a giant mushroom. And you will remember
that your finger made a dent in the dough, and that slowly, but quite
surely, the dent disappeared, and the dough looked quite the same as it
did before you touched it. Unless, of course, your hand was extra dirty,
in which case, naturally, there would be a little black mark.

Well, it was just like that with the sorrow the children had felt at
Father's going away, and at Mother's being so unhappy. It made a deep
impression, but the impression did not last long.

They soon got used to being without Father, though they did not forget
him; and they got used to not going to school, and to seeing very little
of Mother, who was now almost all day shut up in her upstairs room
writing, writing, writing. She used to come down at tea-time and read
aloud the stories she had written. They were lovely stories.

The rocks and hills and valleys and trees, the canal, and above all, the
railway, were so new and so perfectly pleasing that the remembrance of
the old life in the villa grew to seem almost like a dream.

Mother had told them more than once that they were 'quite poor now,' but
this did not seem to be anything but a way of speaking. Grown-up people,
even Mothers, often make remarks that don't seem to mean anything in
particular, just for the sake of saying something, seemingly. There was
always enough to eat, and they wore the same kind of nice clothes they
had always worn.

But in June came three wet days; the rain came down, straight as lances,
and it was very, very cold. Nobody could go out, and everybody shivered.
They all went up to the door of Mother's room and knocked.

“Well, what is it?” asked Mother from inside.

“Mother,” said Bobbie, “mayn't I light a fire? I do know how.”

And Mother said: “No, my ducky-love. We mustn't have fires in June--coal
is so dear. If you're cold, go and have a good romp in the attic.
That'll warm you.”

“But, Mother, it only takes such a very little coal to make a fire.”

“It's more than we can afford, chickeny-love,” said Mother, cheerfully.
“Now run away, there's darlings--I'm madly busy!”

“Mother's always busy now,” said Phyllis, in a whisper to Peter. Peter
did not answer. He shrugged his shoulders. He was thinking.

Thought, however, could not long keep itself from the suitable
furnishing of a bandit's lair in the attic. Peter was the bandit, of
course. Bobbie was his lieutenant, his band of trusty robbers, and, in
due course, the parent of Phyllis, who was the captured maiden for whom
a magnificent ransom--in horse-beans--was unhesitatingly paid.

They all went down to tea flushed and joyous as any mountain brigands.

But when Phyllis was going to add jam to her bread and butter, Mother
said:--

“Jam OR butter, dear--not jam AND butter. We can't afford that sort of
reckless luxury nowadays.”

Phyllis finished the slice of bread and butter in silence, and followed
it up by bread and jam. Peter mingled thought and weak tea.

After tea they went back to the attic and he said to his sisters:--

“I have an idea.”

“What's that?” they asked politely.

“I shan't tell you,” was Peter's unexpected rejoinder.

“Oh, very well,” said Bobbie; and Phil said, “Don't, then.”

“Girls,” said Peter, “are always so hasty tempered.”

“I should like to know what boys are?” said Bobbie, with fine disdain.
“I don't want to know about your silly ideas.”

“You'll know some day,” said Peter, keeping his own temper by what
looked exactly like a miracle; “if you hadn't been so keen on a row, I
might have told you about it being only noble-heartedness that made me
not tell you my idea. But now I shan't tell you anything at all about
it--so there!”

And it was, indeed, some time before he could be induced to say
anything, and when he did it wasn't much. He said:--

“The only reason why I won't tell you my idea that I'm going to do is
because it MAY be wrong, and I don't want to drag you into it.”

“Don't you do it if it's wrong, Peter,” said Bobbie; “let me do it.” But
Phyllis said:--

“_I_ should like to do wrong if YOU'RE going to!”

“No,” said Peter, rather touched by this devotion; “it's a forlorn hope,
and I'm going to lead it. All I ask is that if Mother asks where I am,
you won't blab.”

“We haven't got anything TO blab,” said Bobbie, indignantly.

“Oh, yes, you have!” said Peter, dropping horse-beans through his
fingers. “I've trusted you to the death. You know I'm going to do a lone
adventure--and some people might think it wrong--I don't. And if Mother
asks where I am, say I'm playing at mines.”

“What sort of mines?”

“You just say mines.”

“You might tell US, Pete.”

“Well, then, COAL-mines. But don't you let the word pass your lips on
pain of torture.”

“You needn't threaten,” said Bobbie, “and I do think you might let us
help.”

“If I find a coal-mine, you shall help cart the coal,” Peter
condescended to promise.

“Keep your secret if you like,” said Phyllis.

“Keep it if you CAN,” said Bobbie.

“I'll keep it, right enough,” said Peter.

Between tea and supper there is an interval even in the most greedily
regulated families. At this time Mother was usually writing, and Mrs.
Viney had gone home.

Two nights after the dawning of Peter's idea he beckoned the girls
mysteriously at the twilight hour.

“Come hither with me,” he said, “and bring the Roman Chariot.”

The Roman Chariot was a very old perambulator that had spent years of
retirement in the loft over the coach-house. The children had oiled its
works till it glided noiseless as a pneumatic bicycle, and answered to
the helm as it had probably done in its best days.

“Follow your dauntless leader,” said Peter, and led the way down the
hill towards the station.

Just above the station many rocks have pushed their heads out through
the turf as though they, like the children, were interested in the
railway.

In a little hollow between three rocks lay a heap of dried brambles and
heather.

Peter halted, turned over the brushwood with a well-scarred boot, and
said:--

“Here's the first coal from the St. Peter's Mine. We'll take it home in
the chariot. Punctuality and despatch. All orders carefully attended to.
Any shaped lump cut to suit regular customers.”

The chariot was packed full of coal. And when it was packed it had to
be unpacked again because it was so heavy that it couldn't be got up the
hill by the three children, not even when Peter harnessed himself to the
handle with his braces, and firmly grasping his waistband in one hand
pulled while the girls pushed behind.

Three journeys had to be made before the coal from Peter's mine was
added to the heap of Mother's coal in the cellar.

Afterwards Peter went out alone, and came back very black and
mysterious.

“I've been to my coal-mine,” he said; “to-morrow evening we'll bring
home the black diamonds in the chariot.”

It was a week later that Mrs. Viney remarked to Mother how well this
last lot of coal was holding out.

The children hugged themselves and each other in complicated wriggles of
silent laughter as they listened on the stairs. They had all forgotten
by now that there had ever been any doubt in Peter's mind as to whether
coal-mining was wrong.

But there came a dreadful night when the Station Master put on a pair
of old sand shoes that he had worn at the seaside in his summer holiday,
and crept out very quietly to the yard where the Sodom and Gomorrah heap
of coal was, with the whitewashed line round it. He crept out there, and
he waited like a cat by a mousehole. On the top of the heap something
small and dark was scrabbling and rattling furtively among the coal.

The Station Master concealed himself in the shadow of a brake-van that
had a little tin chimney and was labelled:--

     G. N. and S. R.
          34576
    Return at once to
  White Heather Sidings

and in this concealment he lurked till the small thing on the top of
the heap ceased to scrabble and rattle, came to the edge of the heap,
cautiously let itself down, and lifted something after it. Then the arm
of the Station Master was raised, the hand of the Station Master fell
on a collar, and there was Peter firmly held by the jacket, with an old
carpenter's bag full of coal in his trembling clutch.

“So I've caught you at last, have I, you young thief?” said the Station
Master.

“I'm not a thief,” said Peter, as firmly as he could. “I'm a
coal-miner.”

“Tell that to the Marines,” said the Station Master.

“It would be just as true whoever I told it to,” said Peter.

“You're right there,” said the man, who held him. “Stow your jaw, you
young rip, and come along to the station.”

“Oh, no,” cried in the darkness an agonised voice that was not Peter's.

“Not the POLICE station!” said another voice from the darkness.

“Not yet,” said the Station Master. “The Railway Station first. Why,
it's a regular gang. Any more of you?”

“Only us,” said Bobbie and Phyllis, coming out of the shadow of another
truck labelled Staveley Colliery, and bearing on it the legend in white
chalk: 'Wanted in No. 1 Road.'

“What do you mean by spying on a fellow like this?” said Peter, angrily.

“Time someone did spy on you, _I_ think,” said the Station Master. “Come
along to the station.”

“Oh, DON'T!” said Bobbie. “Can't you decide NOW what you'll do to us?
It's our fault just as much as Peter's. We helped to carry the coal
away--and we knew where he got it.”

“No, you didn't,” said Peter.

“Yes, we did,” said Bobbie. “We knew all the time. We only pretended we
didn't just to humour you.”

Peter's cup was full. He had mined for coal, he had struck coal, he had
been caught, and now he learned that his sisters had 'humoured' him.

“Don't hold me!” he said. “I won't run away.”

The Station Master loosed Peter's collar, struck a match and looked at
them by its flickering light.

“Why,” said he, “you're the children from the Three Chimneys up yonder.
So nicely dressed, too. Tell me now, what made you do such a thing?
Haven't you ever been to church or learned your catechism or anything,
not to know it's wicked to steal?” He spoke much more gently now, and
Peter said:--

“I didn't think it was stealing. I was almost sure it wasn't. I thought
if I took it from the outside part of the heap, perhaps it would be. But
in the middle I thought I could fairly count it only mining. It'll
take thousands of years for you to burn up all that coal and get to the
middle parts.”

“Not quite. But did you do it for a lark or what?”

“Not much lark carting that beastly heavy stuff up the hill,” said
Peter, indignantly.

“Then why did you?” The Station Master's voice was so much kinder now
that Peter replied:--

“You know that wet day? Well, Mother said we were too poor to have a
fire. We always had fires when it was cold at our other house, and--”

“DON'T!” interrupted Bobbie, in a whisper.

“Well,” said the Station Master, rubbing his chin thoughtfully, “I'll
tell you what I'll do. I'll look over it this once. But you remember,
young gentleman, stealing is stealing, and what's mine isn't yours,
whether you call it mining or whether you don't. Run along home.”

“Do you mean you aren't going to do anything to us? Well, you are a
brick,” said Peter, with enthusiasm.

“You're a dear,” said Bobbie.

“You're a darling,” said Phyllis.

“That's all right,” said the Station Master.

And on this they parted.

“Don't speak to me,” said Peter, as the three went up the hill. “You're
spies and traitors--that's what you are.”

But the girls were too glad to have Peter between them, safe and free,
and on the way to Three Chimneys and not to the Police Station, to mind
much what he said.

“We DID say it was us as much as you,” said Bobbie, gently.

“Well--and it wasn't.”

“It would have come to the same thing in Courts with judges,” said
Phyllis. “Don't be snarky, Peter. It isn't our fault your secrets are so
jolly easy to find out.” She took his arm, and he let her.

“There's an awful lot of coal in the cellar, anyhow,” he went on.

“Oh, don't!” said Bobbie. “I don't think we ought to be glad about
THAT.”

“I don't know,” said Peter, plucking up a spirit. “I'm not at all sure,
even now, that mining is a crime.”

But the girls were quite sure. And they were also quite sure that he was
quite sure, however little he cared to own it.



Chapter III. The old gentleman.


After the adventure of Peter's Coal-mine, it seemed well to the children
to keep away from the station--but they did not, they could not, keep
away from the railway. They had lived all their lives in a street where
cabs and omnibuses rumbled by at all hours, and the carts of butchers
and bakers and candlestick makers (I never saw a candlestick-maker's
cart; did you?) might occur at any moment. Here in the deep silence of
the sleeping country the only things that went by were the trains. They
seemed to be all that was left to link the children to the old life that
had once been theirs. Straight down the hill in front of Three Chimneys
the daily passage of their six feet began to mark a path across the
crisp, short turf. They began to know the hours when certain trains
passed, and they gave names to them. The 9.15 up was called the Green
Dragon. The 10.7 down was the Worm of Wantley. The midnight town
express, whose shrieking rush they sometimes woke from their dreams
to hear, was the Fearsome Fly-by-night. Peter got up once, in chill
starshine, and, peeping at it through his curtains, named it on the
spot.

It was by the Green Dragon that the old gentleman travelled. He was a
very nice-looking old gentleman, and he looked as if he were nice,
too, which is not at all the same thing. He had a fresh-coloured,
clean-shaven face and white hair, and he wore rather odd-shaped collars
and a top-hat that wasn't exactly the same kind as other people's. Of
course the children didn't see all this at first. In fact the first
thing they noticed about the old gentleman was his hand.

It was one morning as they sat on the fence waiting for the Green
Dragon, which was three and a quarter minutes late by Peter's Waterbury
watch that he had had given him on his last birthday.

“The Green Dragon's going where Father is,” said Phyllis; “if it were
a really real dragon, we could stop it and ask it to take our love to
Father.”

“Dragons don't carry people's love,” said Peter; “they'd be above it.”

“Yes, they do, if you tame them thoroughly first. They fetch and carry
like pet spaniels,” said Phyllis, “and feed out of your hand. I wonder
why Father never writes to us.”

“Mother says he's been too busy,” said Bobbie; “but he'll write soon,
she says.”

“I say,” Phyllis suggested, “let's all wave to the Green Dragon as it
goes by. If it's a magic dragon, it'll understand and take our loves to
Father. And if it isn't, three waves aren't much. We shall never miss
them.”

So when the Green Dragon tore shrieking out of the mouth of its dark
lair, which was the tunnel, all three children stood on the railing and
waved their pocket-handkerchiefs without stopping to think whether they
were clean handkerchiefs or the reverse. They were, as a matter of fact,
very much the reverse.

And out of a first-class carriage a hand waved back. A quite clean hand.
It held a newspaper. It was the old gentleman's hand.

After this it became the custom for waves to be exchanged between the
children and the 9.15.

And the children, especially the girls, liked to think that perhaps the
old gentleman knew Father, and would meet him 'in business,' wherever
that shady retreat might be, and tell him how his three children stood
on a rail far away in the green country and waved their love to him
every morning, wet or fine.

For they were now able to go out in all sorts of weather such as they
would never have been allowed to go out in when they lived in their
villa house. This was Aunt Emma's doing, and the children felt more and
more that they had not been quite fair to this unattractive aunt, when
they found how useful were the long gaiters and waterproof coats that
they had laughed at her for buying for them.

Mother, all this time, was very busy with her writing. She used to send
off a good many long blue envelopes with stories in them--and large
envelopes of different sizes and colours used to come to her. Sometimes
she would sigh when she opened them and say:--

“Another story come home to roost. Oh, dear, Oh, dear!” and then the
children would be very sorry.

But sometimes she would wave the envelope in the air and say:--“Hooray,
hooray. Here's a sensible Editor. He's taken my story and this is the
proof of it.”

At first the children thought 'the Proof' meant the letter the sensible
Editor had written, but they presently got to know that the proof was
long slips of paper with the story printed on them.

Whenever an Editor was sensible there were buns for tea.

One day Peter was going down to the village to get buns to celebrate
the sensibleness of the Editor of the Children's Globe, when he met the
Station Master.

Peter felt very uncomfortable, for he had now had time to think over the
affair of the coal-mine. He did not like to say “Good morning” to the
Station Master, as you usually do to anyone you meet on a lonely road,
because he had a hot feeling, which spread even to his ears, that the
Station Master might not care to speak to a person who had stolen coals.
'Stolen' is a nasty word, but Peter felt it was the right one. So he
looked down, and said Nothing.

It was the Station Master who said “Good morning” as he passed by. And
Peter answered, “Good morning.” Then he thought:--

“Perhaps he doesn't know who I am by daylight, or he wouldn't be so
polite.”

And he did not like the feeling which thinking this gave him. And then
before he knew what he was going to do he ran after the Station Master,
who stopped when he heard Peter's hasty boots crunching the road,
and coming up with him very breathless and with his ears now quite
magenta-coloured, he said:--

“I don't want you to be polite to me if you don't know me when you see
me.”

“Eh?” said the Station Master.

“I thought perhaps you didn't know it was me that took the coals,”
 Peter went on, “when you said 'Good morning.' But it was, and I'm sorry.
There.”

“Why,” said the Station Master, “I wasn't thinking anything at all about
the precious coals. Let bygones be bygones. And where were you off to in
such a hurry?”

“I'm going to buy buns for tea,” said Peter.

“I thought you were all so poor,” said the Station Master.

“So we are,” said Peter, confidentially, “but we always have three
pennyworth of halfpennies for tea whenever Mother sells a story or a
poem or anything.”

“Oh,” said the Station Master, “so your Mother writes stories, does
she?”

“The beautifulest you ever read,” said Peter.

“You ought to be very proud to have such a clever Mother.”

“Yes,” said Peter, “but she used to play with us more before she had to
be so clever.”

“Well,” said the Station Master, “I must be getting along. You give us
a look in at the Station whenever you feel so inclined. And as to coals,
it's a word that--well--oh, no, we never mention it, eh?”

“Thank you,” said Peter. “I'm very glad it's all straightened out
between us.” And he went on across the canal bridge to the village to
get the buns, feeling more comfortable in his mind than he had felt
since the hand of the Station Master had fastened on his collar that
night among the coals.

Next day when they had sent the threefold wave of greeting to Father by
the Green Dragon, and the old gentleman had waved back as usual, Peter
proudly led the way to the station.

“But ought we?” said Bobbie.

“After the coals, she means,” Phyllis explained.

“I met the Station Master yesterday,” said Peter, in an offhand way,
and he pretended not to hear what Phyllis had said; “he expresspecially
invited us to go down any time we liked.”

“After the coals?” repeated Phyllis. “Stop a minute--my bootlace is
undone again.”

“It always IS undone again,” said Peter, “and the Station Master was
more of a gentleman than you'll ever be, Phil--throwing coal at a chap's
head like that.”

Phyllis did up her bootlace and went on in silence, but her shoulders
shook, and presently a fat tear fell off her nose and splashed on the
metal of the railway line. Bobbie saw it.

“Why, what's the matter, darling?” she said, stopping short and putting
her arm round the heaving shoulders.

“He called me un-un-ungentlemanly,” sobbed Phyllis. “I didn't never call
him unladylike, not even when he tied my Clorinda to the firewood bundle
and burned her at the stake for a martyr.”

Peter had indeed perpetrated this outrage a year or two before.

“Well, you began, you know,” said Bobbie, honestly, “about coals and all
that. Don't you think you'd better both unsay everything since the wave,
and let honour be satisfied?”

“I will if Peter will,” said Phyllis, sniffling.

“All right,” said Peter; “honour is satisfied. Here, use my hankie,
Phil, for goodness' sake, if you've lost yours as usual. I wonder what
you do with them.”

“You had my last one,” said Phyllis, indignantly, “to tie up the
rabbit-hutch door with. But you're very ungrateful. It's quite right
what it says in the poetry book about sharper than a serpent it is to
have a toothless child--but it means ungrateful when it says toothless.
Miss Lowe told me so.”

“All right,” said Peter, impatiently, “I'm sorry. THERE! Now will you
come on?”

They reached the station and spent a joyous two hours with the Porter.
He was a worthy man and seemed never tired of answering the questions
that begin with “Why--” which many people in higher ranks of life often
seem weary of.

He told them many things that they had not known before--as, for
instance, that the things that hook carriages together are called
couplings, and that the pipes like great serpents that hang over the
couplings are meant to stop the train with.

“If you could get a holt of one o' them when the train is going and pull
'em apart,” said he, “she'd stop dead off with a jerk.”

“Who's she?” said Phyllis.

“The train, of course,” said the Porter. After that the train was never
again 'It' to the children.

“And you know the thing in the carriages where it says on it, 'Five
pounds' fine for improper use.' If you was to improperly use that, the
train 'ud stop.”

“And if you used it properly?” said Roberta.

“It 'ud stop just the same, I suppose,” said he, “but it isn't proper
use unless you're being murdered. There was an old lady once--someone
kidded her on it was a refreshment-room bell, and she used it improper,
not being in danger of her life, though hungry, and when the train
stopped and the guard came along expecting to find someone weltering in
their last moments, she says, 'Oh, please, Mister, I'll take a glass of
stout and a bath bun,' she says. And the train was seven minutes behind
her time as it was.”

“What did the guard say to the old lady?”

“_I_ dunno,” replied the Porter, “but I lay she didn't forget it in a
hurry, whatever it was.”

In such delightful conversation the time went by all too quickly.

The Station Master came out once or twice from that sacred inner temple
behind the place where the hole is that they sell you tickets through,
and was most jolly with them all.

“Just as if coal had never been discovered,” Phyllis whispered to her
sister.

He gave them each an orange, and promised to take them up into the
signal-box one of these days, when he wasn't so busy.

Several trains went through the station, and Peter noticed for the first
time that engines have numbers on them, like cabs.

“Yes,” said the Porter, “I knowed a young gent as used to take down the
numbers of every single one he seed; in a green note-book with silver
corners it was, owing to his father being very well-to-do in the
wholesale stationery.”

Peter felt that he could take down numbers, too, even if he was not
the son of a wholesale stationer. As he did not happen to have a green
leather note-book with silver corners, the Porter gave him a yellow
envelope and on it he noted:--

     379
     663

and felt that this was the beginning of what would be a most interesting
collection.

That night at tea he asked Mother if she had a green leather note-book
with silver corners. She had not; but when she heard what he wanted it
for she gave him a little black one.

“It has a few pages torn out,” said she; “but it will hold quite a lot
of numbers, and when it's full I'll give you another. I'm so glad you
like the railway. Only, please, you mustn't walk on the line.”

“Not if we face the way the train's coming?” asked Peter, after a gloomy
pause, in which glances of despair were exchanged.

“No--really not,” said Mother.

Then Phyllis said, “Mother, didn't YOU ever walk on the railway lines
when you were little?”

Mother was an honest and honourable Mother, so she had to say, “Yes.”

“Well, then,” said Phyllis.

“But, darlings, you don't know how fond I am of you. What should I do if
you got hurt?”

“Are you fonder of us than Granny was of you when you were little?”
 Phyllis asked. Bobbie made signs to her to stop, but Phyllis never did
see signs, no matter how plain they might be.

Mother did not answer for a minute. She got up to put more water in the
teapot.

“No one,” she said at last, “ever loved anyone more than my mother loved
me.”

Then she was quiet again, and Bobbie kicked Phyllis hard under the
table, because Bobbie understood a little bit the thoughts that were
making Mother so quiet--the thoughts of the time when Mother was a
little girl and was all the world to HER mother. It seems so easy and
natural to run to Mother when one is in trouble. Bobbie understood a
little how people do not leave off running to their mothers when they
are in trouble even when they are grown up, and she thought she knew a
little what it must be to be sad, and have no mother to run to any more.

So she kicked Phyllis, who said:--

“What are you kicking me like that for, Bob?”

And then Mother laughed a little and sighed and said:--

“Very well, then. Only let me be sure you do know which way the trains
come--and don't walk on the line near the tunnel or near corners.”

“Trains keep to the left like carriages,” said Peter, “so if we keep to
the right, we're bound to see them coming.”

“Very well,” said Mother, and I dare say you think that she ought not
to have said it. But she remembered about when she was a little girl
herself, and she did say it--and neither her own children nor you nor
any other children in the world could ever understand exactly what it
cost her to do it. Only some few of you, like Bobbie, may understand a
very little bit.

It was the very next day that Mother had to stay in bed because her head
ached so. Her hands were burning hot, and she would not eat anything,
and her throat was very sore.

“If I was you, Mum,” said Mrs. Viney, “I should take and send for the
doctor. There's a lot of catchy complaints a-going about just now. My
sister's eldest--she took a chill and it went to her inside, two years
ago come Christmas, and she's never been the same gell since.”

Mother wouldn't at first, but in the evening she felt so much worse that
Peter was sent to the house in the village that had three laburnum trees
by the gate, and on the gate a brass plate with W. W. Forrest, M.D., on
it.

W. W. Forrest, M.D., came at once. He talked to Peter on the way back.
He seemed a most charming and sensible man, interested in railways, and
rabbits, and really important things.

When he had seen Mother, he said it was influenza.

“Now, Lady Grave-airs,” he said in the hall to Bobbie, “I suppose you'll
want to be head-nurse.”

“Of course,” said she.

“Well, then, I'll send down some medicine. Keep up a good fire. Have
some strong beef tea made ready to give her as soon as the fever goes
down. She can have grapes now, and beef essence--and soda-water and
milk, and you'd better get in a bottle of brandy. The best brandy. Cheap
brandy is worse than poison.”

She asked him to write it all down, and he did.

When Bobbie showed Mother the list he had written, Mother laughed. It
WAS a laugh, Bobbie decided, though it was rather odd and feeble.

“Nonsense,” said Mother, laying in bed with eyes as bright as beads.
“I can't afford all that rubbish. Tell Mrs. Viney to boil two pounds of
scrag-end of the neck for your dinners to-morrow, and I can have some
of the broth. Yes, I should like some more water now, love. And will you
get a basin and sponge my hands?”

Roberta obeyed. When she had done everything she could to make Mother
less uncomfortable, she went down to the others. Her cheeks were very
red, her lips set tight, and her eyes almost as bright as Mother's.

She told them what the Doctor had said, and what Mother had said.

“And now,” said she, when she had told all, “there's no one but us to do
anything, and we've got to do it. I've got the shilling for the mutton.”

“We can do without the beastly mutton,” said Peter; “bread and butter
will support life. People have lived on less on desert islands many a
time.”

“Of course,” said his sister. And Mrs. Viney was sent to the village to
get as much brandy and soda-water and beef tea as she could buy for a
shilling.

“But even if we never have anything to eat at all,” said Phyllis, “you
can't get all those other things with our dinner money.”

“No,” said Bobbie, frowning, “we must find out some other way. Now
THINK, everybody, just as hard as ever you can.”

They did think. And presently they talked. And later, when Bobbie had
gone up to sit with Mother in case she wanted anything, the other two
were very busy with scissors and a white sheet, and a paint brush, and
the pot of Brunswick black that Mrs. Viney used for grates and fenders.
They did not manage to do what they wished, exactly, with the first
sheet, so they took another out of the linen cupboard. It did not occur
to them that they were spoiling good sheets which cost good money. They
only knew that they were making a good--but what they were making comes
later.

Bobbie's bed had been moved into Mother's room, and several times in
the night she got up to mend the fire, and to give her mother milk and
soda-water. Mother talked to herself a good deal, but it did not seem
to mean anything. And once she woke up suddenly and called out: “Mamma,
mamma!” and Bobbie knew she was calling for Granny, and that she had
forgotten that it was no use calling, because Granny was dead.

In the early morning Bobbie heard her name and jumped out of bed and ran
to Mother's bedside.

“Oh--ah, yes--I think I was asleep,” said Mother. “My poor little duck,
how tired you'll be--I do hate to give you all this trouble.”

“Trouble!” said Bobbie.

“Ah, don't cry, sweet,” Mother said; “I shall be all right in a day or
two.”

And Bobbie said, “Yes,” and tried to smile.

When you are used to ten hours of solid sleep, to get up three or four
times in your sleep-time makes you feel as though you had been up all
night. Bobbie felt quite stupid and her eyes were sore and stiff, but
she tidied the room, and arranged everything neatly before the Doctor
came.

This was at half-past eight.

“Everything going on all right, little Nurse?” he said at the front
door. “Did you get the brandy?”

“I've got the brandy,” said Bobbie, “in a little flat bottle.”

“I didn't see the grapes or the beef tea, though,” said he.

“No,” said Bobbie, firmly, “but you will to-morrow. And there's some
beef stewing in the oven for beef tea.”

“Who told you to do that?” he asked.

“I noticed what Mother did when Phil had mumps.”

“Right,” said the Doctor. “Now you get your old woman to sit with your
mother, and then you eat a good breakfast, and go straight to bed and
sleep till dinner-time. We can't afford to have the head-nurse ill.”

He was really quite a nice doctor.

When the 9.15 came out of the tunnel that morning the old gentleman in
the first-class carriage put down his newspaper, and got ready to wave
his hand to the three children on the fence. But this morning there were
not three. There was only one. And that was Peter.

Peter was not on the railings either, as usual. He was standing in front
of them in an attitude like that of a show-man showing off the animals
in a menagerie, or of the kind clergyman when he points with a wand at
the 'Scenes from Palestine,' when there is a magic-lantern and he is
explaining it.

Peter was pointing, too. And what he was pointing at was a large white
sheet nailed against the fence. On the sheet there were thick black
letters more than a foot long.

Some of them had run a little, because of Phyllis having put the
Brunswick black on too eagerly, but the words were quite easy to read.

And this what the old gentleman and several other people in the train
read in the large black letters on the white sheet:--

     LOOK OUT AT THE STATION.

A good many people did look out at the station and were disappointed,
for they saw nothing unusual. The old gentleman looked out, too, and at
first he too saw nothing more unusual than the gravelled platform and
the sunshine and the wallflowers and forget-me-nots in the station
borders. It was only just as the train was beginning to puff and pull
itself together to start again that he saw Phyllis. She was quite out of
breath with running.

“Oh,” she said, “I thought I'd missed you. My bootlaces would keep
coming down and I fell over them twice. Here, take it.”

She thrust a warm, dampish letter into his hand as the train moved.

He leaned back in his corner and opened the letter. This is what he
read:--

“Dear Mr. We do not know your name.

Mother is ill and the doctor says to give her the things at the end of
the letter, but she says she can't aford it, and to get mutton for
us and she will have the broth. We do not know anybody here but you,
because Father is away and we do not know the address. Father will pay
you, or if he has lost all his money, or anything, Peter will pay you
when he is a man. We promise it on our honer. I.O.U. for all the things
Mother wants.

     “sined Peter.

“Will you give the parsel to the Station Master, because of us not
knowing what train you come down by? Say it is for Peter that was sorry
about the coals and he will know all right.

     “Roberta.
     “Phyllis.
     “Peter.”

Then came the list of things the Doctor had ordered.

The old gentleman read it through once, and his eyebrows went up. He
read it twice and smiled a little. When he had read it thrice, he put it
in his pocket and went on reading The Times.

At about six that evening there was a knock at the back door. The three
children rushed to open it, and there stood the friendly Porter, who had
told them so many interesting things about railways. He dumped down a
big hamper on the kitchen flags.

“Old gent,” he said; “he asked me to fetch it up straight away.”

“Thank you very much,” said Peter, and then, as the Porter lingered, he
added:--

“I'm most awfully sorry I haven't got twopence to give you like Father
does, but--”

“You drop it if you please,” said the Porter, indignantly. “I wasn't
thinking about no tuppences. I only wanted to say I was sorry your Mamma
wasn't so well, and to ask how she finds herself this evening--and
I've fetched her along a bit of sweetbrier, very sweet to smell it is.
Twopence indeed,” said he, and produced a bunch of sweetbrier from his
hat, “just like a conjurer,” as Phyllis remarked afterwards.

“Thank you very much,” said Peter, “and I beg your pardon about the
twopence.”

“No offence,” said the Porter, untruly but politely, and went.

Then the children undid the hamper. First there was straw, and then
there were fine shavings, and then came all the things they had asked
for, and plenty of them, and then a good many things they had not asked
for; among others peaches and port wine and two chickens, a cardboard
box of big red roses with long stalks, and a tall thin green bottle
of lavender water, and three smaller fatter bottles of eau-de-Cologne.
There was a letter, too.

“Dear Roberta and Phyllis and Peter,” it said; “here are the things you
want. Your mother will want to know where they came from. Tell her they
were sent by a friend who heard she was ill. When she is well again you
must tell her all about it, of course. And if she says you ought not to
have asked for the things, tell her that I say you were quite right,
and that I hope she will forgive me for taking the liberty of allowing
myself a very great pleasure.”

The letter was signed G. P. something that the children couldn't read.

“I think we WERE right,” said Phyllis.

“Right? Of course we were right,” said Bobbie.

“All the same,” said Peter, with his hands in his pockets, “I don't
exactly look forward to telling Mother the whole truth about it.”

“We're not to do it till she's well,” said Bobbie, “and when she's well
we shall be so happy we shan't mind a little fuss like that. Oh, just
look at the roses! I must take them up to her.”

“And the sweetbrier,” said Phyllis, sniffing it loudly; “don't forget
the sweetbrier.”

“As if I should!” said Roberta. “Mother told me the other day there was
a thick hedge of it at her mother's house when she was a little girl.”



Chapter IV. The engine-burglar.


What was left of the second sheet and the Brunswick black came in very
nicely to make a banner bearing the legend

     SHE IS NEARLY WELL THANK YOU

and this was displayed to the Green Dragon about a fortnight after the
arrival of the wonderful hamper. The old gentleman saw it, and waved
a cheerful response from the train. And when this had been done the
children saw that now was the time when they must tell Mother what they
had done when she was ill. And it did not seem nearly so easy as they
had thought it would be. But it had to be done. And it was done. Mother
was extremely angry. She was seldom angry, and now she was angrier than
they had ever known her. This was horrible. But it was much worse when
she suddenly began to cry. Crying is catching, I believe, like measles
and whooping-cough. At any rate, everyone at once found itself taking
part in a crying-party.

Mother stopped first. She dried her eyes and then she said:--

“I'm sorry I was so angry, darlings, because I know you didn't
understand.”

“We didn't mean to be naughty, Mammy,” sobbed Bobbie, and Peter and
Phyllis sniffed.

“Now, listen,” said Mother; “it's quite true that we're poor, but
we have enough to live on. You mustn't go telling everyone about our
affairs--it's not right. And you must never, never, never ask strangers
to give you things. Now always remember that--won't you?”

They all hugged her and rubbed their damp cheeks against hers and
promised that they would.

“And I'll write a letter to your old gentleman, and I shall tell him
that I didn't approve--oh, of course I shall thank him, too, for
his kindness. It's YOU I don't approve of, my darlings, not the old
gentleman. He was as kind as ever he could be. And you can give the
letter to the Station Master to give him--and we won't say any more
about it.”

Afterwards, when the children were alone, Bobbie said:--

“Isn't Mother splendid? You catch any other grown-up saying they were
sorry they had been angry.”

“Yes,” said Peter, “she IS splendid; but it's rather awful when she's
angry.”

“She's like Avenging and Bright in the song,” said Phyllis. “I should
like to look at her if it wasn't so awful. She looks so beautiful when
she's really downright furious.”

They took the letter down to the Station Master.

“I thought you said you hadn't got any friends except in London,” said
he.

“We've made him since,” said Peter.

“But he doesn't live hereabouts?”

“No--we just know him on the railway.”

Then the Station Master retired to that sacred inner temple behind the
little window where the tickets are sold, and the children went down
to the Porters' room and talked to the Porter. They learned several
interesting things from him--among others that his name was Perks,
that he was married and had three children, that the lamps in front of
engines are called head-lights and the ones at the back tail-lights.

“And that just shows,” whispered Phyllis, “that trains really ARE
dragons in disguise, with proper heads and tails.”

It was on this day that the children first noticed that all engines are
not alike.

“Alike?” said the Porter, whose name was Perks, “lor, love you, no,
Miss. No more alike nor what you an' me are. That little 'un without
a tender as went by just now all on her own, that was a tank, that
was--she's off to do some shunting t'other side o' Maidbridge. That's as
it might be you, Miss. Then there's goods engines, great, strong things
with three wheels each side--joined with rods to strengthen 'em--as it
might be me. Then there's main-line engines as it might be this
'ere young gentleman when he grows up and wins all the races at 'is
school--so he will. The main-line engine she's built for speed as well
as power. That's one to the 9.15 up.”

“The Green Dragon,” said Phyllis.

“We calls her the Snail, Miss, among ourselves,” said the Porter. “She's
oftener be'ind'and nor any train on the line.”

“But the engine's green,” said Phyllis.

“Yes, Miss,” said Perks, “so's a snail some seasons o' the year.”

The children agreed as they went home to dinner that the Porter was most
delightful company.

Next day was Roberta's birthday. In the afternoon she was politely but
firmly requested to get out of the way and keep there till tea-time.

“You aren't to see what we're going to do till it's done; it's a
glorious surprise,” said Phyllis.

And Roberta went out into the garden all alone. She tried to be
grateful, but she felt she would much rather have helped in whatever it
was than have to spend her birthday afternoon by herself, no matter how
glorious the surprise might be.

Now that she was alone, she had time to think, and one of the things she
thought of most was what mother had said in one of those feverish nights
when her hands were so hot and her eyes so bright.

The words were: “Oh, what a doctor's bill there'll be for this!”

She walked round and round the garden among the rose-bushes that hadn't
any roses yet, only buds, and the lilac bushes and syringas and American
currants, and the more she thought of the doctor's bill, the less she
liked the thought of it.

And presently she made up her mind. She went out through the side door
of the garden and climbed up the steep field to where the road runs
along by the canal. She walked along until she came to the bridge that
crosses the canal and leads to the village, and here she waited. It was
very pleasant in the sunshine to lean one's elbows on the warm stone
of the bridge and look down at the blue water of the canal. Bobbie had
never seen any other canal, except the Regent's Canal, and the water of
that is not at all a pretty colour. And she had never seen any river at
all except the Thames, which also would be all the better if its face
was washed.

Perhaps the children would have loved the canal as much as the railway,
but for two things. One was that they had found the railway FIRST--on
that first, wonderful morning when the house and the country and the
moors and rocks and great hills were all new to them. They had not found
the canal till some days later. The other reason was that everyone on
the railway had been kind to them--the Station Master, the Porter, and
the old gentleman who waved. And the people on the canal were anything
but kind.

The people on the canal were, of course, the bargees, who steered the
slow barges up and down, or walked beside the old horses that trampled
up the mud of the towing-path, and strained at the long tow-ropes.

Peter had once asked one of the bargees the time, and had been told
to “get out of that,” in a tone so fierce that he did not stop to say
anything about his having just as much right on the towing-path as the
man himself. Indeed, he did not even think of saying it till some time
later.

Then another day when the children thought they would like to fish in
the canal, a boy in a barge threw lumps of coal at them, and one of
these hit Phyllis on the back of the neck. She was just stooping down to
tie up her bootlace--and though the coal hardly hurt at all it made her
not care very much about going on fishing.

On the bridge, however, Roberta felt quite safe, because she could look
down on the canal, and if any boy showed signs of meaning to throw coal,
she could duck behind the parapet.

Presently there was a sound of wheels, which was just what she expected.

The wheels were the wheels of the Doctor's dogcart, and in the cart, of
course, was the Doctor.

He pulled up, and called out:--

“Hullo, head nurse! Want a lift?”

“I wanted to see you,” said Bobbie.

“Your mother's not worse, I hope?” said the Doctor.

“No--but--”

“Well, skip in, then, and we'll go for a drive.”

Roberta climbed in and the brown horse was made to turn round--which it
did not like at all, for it was looking forward to its tea--I mean its
oats.

“This IS jolly,” said Bobbie, as the dogcart flew along the road by the
canal.

“We could throw a stone down any one of your three chimneys,” said the
Doctor, as they passed the house.

“Yes,” said Bobbie, “but you'd have to be a jolly good shot.”

“How do you know I'm not?” said the Doctor. “Now, then, what's the
trouble?”

Bobbie fidgeted with the hook of the driving apron.

“Come, out with it,” said the Doctor.

“It's rather hard, you see,” said Bobbie, “to out with it; because of
what Mother said.”

“What DID Mother say?”

“She said I wasn't to go telling everyone that we're poor. But you
aren't everyone, are you?”

“Not at all,” said the Doctor, cheerfully. “Well?”

“Well, I know doctors are very extravagant--I mean expensive, and Mrs.
Viney told me that her doctoring only cost her twopence a week because
she belonged to a Club.”

“Yes?”

“You see she told me what a good doctor you were, and I asked her how
she could afford you, because she's much poorer than we are. I've been
in her house and I know. And then she told me about the Club, and I
thought I'd ask you--and--oh, I don't want Mother to be worried! Can't
we be in the Club, too, the same as Mrs. Viney?”

The Doctor was silent. He was rather poor himself, and he had been
pleased at getting a new family to attend. So I think his feelings at
that minute were rather mixed.

“You aren't cross with me, are you?” said Bobbie, in a very small voice.

The Doctor roused himself.

“Cross? How could I be? You're a very sensible little woman. Now look
here, don't you worry. I'll make it all right with your Mother, even if
I have to make a special brand-new Club all for her. Look here, this is
where the Aqueduct begins.”

“What's an Aque--what's its name?” asked Bobbie.

“A water bridge,” said the Doctor. “Look.”

The road rose to a bridge over the canal. To the left was a steep rocky
cliff with trees and shrubs growing in the cracks of the rock. And the
canal here left off running along the top of the hill and started to run
on a bridge of its own--a great bridge with tall arches that went right
across the valley.

Bobbie drew a long breath.

“It IS grand, isn't it?” she said. “It's like pictures in the History of
Rome.”

“Right!” said the Doctor, “that's just exactly what it IS like.
The Romans were dead nuts on aqueducts. It's a splendid piece of
engineering.”

“I thought engineering was making engines.”

“Ah, there are different sorts of engineering--making road and bridges
and tunnels is one kind. And making fortifications is another. Well, we
must be turning back. And, remember, you aren't to worry about doctor's
bills or you'll be ill yourself, and then I'll send you in a bill as
long as the aqueduct.”

When Bobbie had parted from the Doctor at the top of the field that ran
down from the road to Three Chimneys, she could not feel that she had
done wrong. She knew that Mother would perhaps think differently.
But Bobbie felt that for once she was the one who was right, and she
scrambled down the rocky slope with a really happy feeling.

Phyllis and Peter met her at the back door. They were unnaturally clean
and neat, and Phyllis had a red bow in her hair. There was only just
time for Bobbie to make herself tidy and tie up her hair with a blue bow
before a little bell rang.

“There!” said Phyllis, “that's to show the surprise is ready. Now
you wait till the bell rings again and then you may come into the
dining-room.”

So Bobbie waited.

“Tinkle, tinkle,” said the little bell, and Bobbie went into the
dining-room, feeling rather shy. Directly she opened the door she found
herself, as it seemed, in a new world of light and flowers and singing.
Mother and Peter and Phyllis were standing in a row at the end of the
table. The shutters were shut and there were twelve candles on the
table, one for each of Roberta's years. The table was covered with a
sort of pattern of flowers, and at Roberta's place was a thick wreath of
forget-me-nots and several most interesting little packages. And Mother
and Phyllis and Peter were singing--to the first part of the tune of St.
Patrick's Day. Roberta knew that Mother had written the words on purpose
for her birthday. It was a little way of Mother's on birthdays. It
had begun on Bobbie's fourth birthday when Phyllis was a baby. Bobbie
remembered learning the verses to say to Father 'for a surprise.' She
wondered if Mother had remembered, too. The four-year-old verse had
been:--

     Daddy dear, I'm only four
     And I'd rather not be more.
     Four's the nicest age to be,
     Two and two and one and three.
     What I love is two and two,
     Mother, Peter, Phil, and you.
     What you love is one and three,
     Mother, Peter, Phil, and me.
     Give your little girl a kiss
     Because she learned and told you this.

The song the others were singing now went like this:--

     Our darling Roberta,
     No sorrow shall hurt her
     If we can prevent it
        Her whole life long.
     Her birthday's our fete day,
     We'll make it our great day,
     And give her our presents
        And sing her our song.
     May pleasures attend her
     And may the Fates send her
     The happiest journey
        Along her life's way.
     With skies bright above her
     And dear ones to love her!
     Dear Bob!  Many happy
        Returns of the day!

When they had finished singing they cried, “Three cheers for our
Bobbie!” and gave them very loudly. Bobbie felt exactly as though she
were going to cry--you know that odd feeling in the bridge of your nose
and the pricking in your eyelids? But before she had time to begin they
were all kissing and hugging her.

“Now,” said Mother, “look at your presents.”

They were very nice presents. There was a green and red needle-book that
Phyllis had made herself in secret moments. There was a darling little
silver brooch of Mother's shaped like a buttercup, which Bobbie had
known and loved for years, but which she had never, never thought would
come to be her very own. There was also a pair of blue glass vases from
Mrs. Viney. Roberta had seen and admired them in the village shop. And
there were three birthday cards with pretty pictures and wishes.

Mother fitted the forget-me-not crown on Bobbie's brown head.

“And now look at the table,” she said.

There was a cake on the table covered with white sugar, with 'Dear
Bobbie' on it in pink sweets, and there were buns and jam; but
the nicest thing was that the big table was almost covered with
flowers--wallflowers were laid all round the tea-tray--there was a ring
of forget-me-nots round each plate. The cake had a wreath of white lilac
round it, and in the middle was something that looked like a pattern all
done with single blooms of lilac or wallflower or laburnum.

“It's a map--a map of the railway!” cried Peter. “Look--those lilac
lines are the metals--and there's the station done in brown wallflowers.
The laburnum is the train, and there are the signal-boxes, and the road
up to here--and those fat red daisies are us three waving to the old
gentleman--that's him, the pansy in the laburnum train.”

“And there's 'Three Chimneys' done in the purple primroses,” said
Phyllis. “And that little tiny rose-bud is Mother looking out for us
when we're late for tea. Peter invented it all, and we got all the
flowers from the station. We thought you'd like it better.”

“That's my present,” said Peter, suddenly dumping down his adored
steam-engine on the table in front of her. Its tender had been lined
with fresh white paper, and was full of sweets.

“Oh, Peter!” cried Bobbie, quite overcome by this munificence, “not your
own dear little engine that you're so fond of?”

“Oh, no,” said Peter, very promptly, “not the engine. Only the sweets.”

Bobbie couldn't help her face changing a little--not so much because she
was disappointed at not getting the engine, as because she had thought
it so very noble of Peter, and now she felt she had been silly to think
it. Also she felt she must have seemed greedy to expect the engine as
well as the sweets. So her face changed. Peter saw it. He hesitated a
minute; then his face changed, too, and he said: “I mean not ALL the
engine. I'll let you go halves if you like.”

“You're a brick,” cried Bobbie; “it's a splendid present.” She said no
more aloud, but to herself she said:--

“That was awfully jolly decent of Peter because I know he didn't mean
to. Well, the broken half shall be my half of the engine, and I'll get
it mended and give it back to Peter for his birthday.”--“Yes, Mother
dear, I should like to cut the cake,” she added, and tea began.

It was a delightful birthday. After tea Mother played games with
them--any game they liked--and of course their first choice was
blindman's-buff, in the course of which Bobbie's forget-me-not wreath
twisted itself crookedly over one of her ears and stayed there. Then,
when it was near bed-time and time to calm down, Mother had a lovely new
story to read to them.

“You won't sit up late working, will you, Mother?” Bobbie asked as they
said good night.

And Mother said no, she wouldn't--she would only just write to Father
and then go to bed.

But when Bobbie crept down later to bring up her presents--for she felt
she really could not be separated from them all night--Mother was not
writing, but leaning her head on her arms and her arms on the table. I
think it was rather good of Bobbie to slip quietly away, saying over and
over, “She doesn't want me to know she's unhappy, and I won't know; I
won't know.” But it made a sad end to the birthday.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

The very next morning Bobbie began to watch her opportunity to get
Peter's engine mended secretly. And the opportunity came the very next
afternoon.

Mother went by train to the nearest town to do shopping. When she went
there, she always went to the Post-office. Perhaps to post her letters
to Father, for she never gave them to the children or Mrs. Viney to
post, and she never went to the village herself. Peter and Phyllis went
with her. Bobbie wanted an excuse not to go, but try as she would she
couldn't think of a good one. And just when she felt that all was lost,
her frock caught on a big nail by the kitchen door and there was a great
criss-cross tear all along the front of the skirt. I assure you this was
really an accident. So the others pitied her and went without her,
for there was no time for her to change, because they were rather late
already and had to hurry to the station to catch the train.

When they had gone, Bobbie put on her everyday frock, and went down to
the railway. She did not go into the station, but she went along the
line to the end of the platform where the engine is when the down train
is alongside the platform--the place where there are a water tank and
a long, limp, leather hose, like an elephant's trunk. She hid behind a
bush on the other side of the railway. She had the toy engine done up in
brown paper, and she waited patiently with it under her arm.

Then when the next train came in and stopped, Bobbie went across the
metals of the up-line and stood beside the engine. She had never been so
close to an engine before. It looked much larger and harder than she
had expected, and it made her feel very small indeed, and, somehow, very
soft--as if she could very, very easily be hurt rather badly.

“I know what silk-worms feel like now,” said Bobbie to herself.

The engine-driver and fireman did not see her. They were leaning out
on the other side, telling the Porter a tale about a dog and a leg of
mutton.

“If you please,” said Roberta--but the engine was blowing off steam and
no one heard her.

“If you please, Mr. Engineer,” she spoke a little louder, but the Engine
happened to speak at the same moment, and of course Roberta's soft
little voice hadn't a chance.

It seemed to her that the only way would be to climb on to the engine
and pull at their coats. The step was high, but she got her knee on it,
and clambered into the cab; she stumbled and fell on hands and knees on
the base of the great heap of coals that led up to the square opening in
the tender. The engine was not above the weaknesses of its fellows; it
was making a great deal more noise than there was the slightest need
for. And just as Roberta fell on the coals, the engine-driver, who
had turned without seeing her, started the engine, and when Bobbie had
picked herself up, the train was moving--not fast, but much too fast for
her to get off.

All sorts of dreadful thoughts came to her all together in one horrible
flash. There were such things as express trains that went on, she
supposed, for hundreds of miles without stopping. Suppose this should be
one of them? How would she get home again? She had no money to pay for
the return journey.

“And I've no business here. I'm an engine-burglar--that's what I am,”
 she thought. “I shouldn't wonder if they could lock me up for this.” And
the train was going faster and faster.

There was something in her throat that made it impossible for her to
speak. She tried twice. The men had their backs to her. They were doing
something to things that looked like taps.

Suddenly she put out her hand and caught hold of the nearest sleeve. The
man turned with a start, and he and Roberta stood for a minute looking
at each other in silence. Then the silence was broken by them both.

The man said, “Here's a bloomin' go!” and Roberta burst into tears.

The other man said he was blooming well blest--or something like it--but
though naturally surprised they were not exactly unkind.

“You're a naughty little gell, that's what you are,” said the fireman,
and the engine-driver said:--

“Daring little piece, I call her,” but they made her sit down on an iron
seat in the cab and told her to stop crying and tell them what she meant
by it.

She did stop, as soon as she could. One thing that helped her was the
thought that Peter would give almost his ears to be in her place--on a
real engine--really going. The children had often wondered whether any
engine-driver could be found noble enough to take them for a ride on an
engine--and now there she was. She dried her eyes and sniffed earnestly.

“Now, then,” said the fireman, “out with it. What do you mean by it,
eh?”

“Oh, please,” sniffed Bobbie.

“Try again,” said the engine-driver, encouragingly.

Bobbie tried again.

“Please, Mr. Engineer,” she said, “I did call out to you from the
line, but you didn't hear me--and I just climbed up to touch you on the
arm--quite gently I meant to do it--and then I fell into the coals--and
I am so sorry if I frightened you. Oh, don't be cross--oh, please
don't!” She sniffed again.

“We ain't so much CROSS,” said the fireman, “as interested like. It
ain't every day a little gell tumbles into our coal bunker outer the
sky, is it, Bill? What did you DO it for--eh?”

“That's the point,” agreed the engine-driver; “what did you do it FOR?”

Bobbie found that she had not quite stopped crying. The engine-driver
patted her on the back and said: “Here, cheer up, Mate. It ain't so bad
as all that 'ere, I'll be bound.”

“I wanted,” said Bobbie, much cheered to find herself addressed as
'Mate'--“I only wanted to ask you if you'd be so kind as to mend this.”
 She picked up the brown-paper parcel from among the coals and undid the
string with hot, red fingers that trembled.

Her feet and legs felt the scorch of the engine fire, but her shoulders
felt the wild chill rush of the air. The engine lurched and shook and
rattled, and as they shot under a bridge the engine seemed to shout in
her ears.

The fireman shovelled on coals.

Bobbie unrolled the brown paper and disclosed the toy engine.

“I thought,” she said wistfully, “that perhaps you'd mend this for
me--because you're an engineer, you know.”

The engine-driver said he was blowed if he wasn't blest.

“I'm blest if I ain't blowed,” remarked the fireman.

But the engine-driver took the little engine and looked at it--and the
fireman ceased for an instant to shovel coal, and looked, too.

“It's like your precious cheek,” said the engine-driver--“whatever made
you think we'd be bothered tinkering penny toys?”

“I didn't mean it for precious cheek,” said Bobbie; “only everybody that
has anything to do with railways is so kind and good, I didn't think
you'd mind. You don't really--do you?” she added, for she had seen a not
unkindly wink pass between the two.

“My trade's driving of an engine, not mending her, especially such a
hout-size in engines as this 'ere,” said Bill. “An' 'ow are we a-goin'
to get you back to your sorrowing friends and relations, and all be
forgiven and forgotten?”

“If you'll put me down next time you stop,” said Bobbie, firmly, though
her heart beat fiercely against her arm as she clasped her hands, “and
lend me the money for a third-class ticket, I'll pay you back--honour
bright. I'm not a confidence trick like in the newspapers--really, I'm
not.”

“You're a little lady, every inch,” said Bill, relenting suddenly
and completely. “We'll see you gets home safe. An' about this
engine--Jim--ain't you got ne'er a pal as can use a soldering iron?
Seems to me that's about all the little bounder wants doing to it.”

“That's what Father said,” Bobbie explained eagerly. “What's that for?”

She pointed to a little brass wheel that he had turned as he spoke.

“That's the injector.”

“In--what?”

“Injector to fill up the boiler.”

“Oh,” said Bobbie, mentally registering the fact to tell the others;
“that IS interesting.”

“This 'ere's the automatic brake,” Bill went on, flattered by her
enthusiasm. “You just move this 'ere little handle--do it with one
finger, you can--and the train jolly soon stops. That's what they call
the Power of Science in the newspapers.”

He showed her two little dials, like clock faces, and told her how one
showed how much steam was going, and the other showed if the brake was
working properly.

By the time she had seen him shut off steam with a big shining steel
handle, Bobbie knew more about the inside working of an engine than she
had ever thought there was to know, and Jim had promised that his second
cousin's wife's brother should solder the toy engine, or Jim would know
the reason why. Besides all the knowledge she had gained Bobbie felt
that she and Bill and Jim were now friends for life, and that they had
wholly and forever forgiven her for stumbling uninvited among the sacred
coals of their tender.

At Stacklepoole Junction she parted from them with warm expressions of
mutual regard. They handed her over to the guard of a returning train--a
friend of theirs--and she had the joy of knowing what guards do in their
secret fastnesses, and understood how, when you pull the communication
cord in railway carriages, a wheel goes round under the guard's nose and
a loud bell rings in his ears. She asked the guard why his van smelt
so fishy, and learned that he had to carry a lot of fish every day, and
that the wetness in the hollows of the corrugated floor had all drained
out of boxes full of plaice and cod and mackerel and soles and smelts.

Bobbie got home in time for tea, and she felt as though her mind would
burst with all that had been put into it since she parted from the
others. How she blessed the nail that had torn her frock!

“Where have you been?” asked the others.

“To the station, of course,” said Roberta. But she would not tell a word
of her adventures till the day appointed, when she mysteriously led them
to the station at the hour of the 3.19's transit, and proudly introduced
them to her friends, Bill and Jim. Jim's second cousin's wife's brother
had not been unworthy of the sacred trust reposed in him. The toy engine
was, literally, as good as new.

“Good-bye--oh, good-bye,” said Bobbie, just before the engine screamed
ITS good-bye. “I shall always, always love you--and Jim's second
cousin's wife's brother as well!”

And as the three children went home up the hill, Peter hugging the
engine, now quite its own self again, Bobbie told, with joyous leaps of
the heart, the story of how she had been an Engine-burglar.



Chapter V. Prisoners and captives.


It was one day when Mother had gone to Maidbridge. She had gone alone,
but the children were to go to the station to meet her. And, loving the
station as they did, it was only natural that they should be there a
good hour before there was any chance of Mother's train arriving, even
if the train were punctual, which was most unlikely. No doubt they would
have been just as early, even if it had been a fine day, and all the
delights of woods and fields and rocks and rivers had been open to them.
But it happened to be a very wet day and, for July, very cold. There was
a wild wind that drove flocks of dark purple clouds across the sky “like
herds of dream-elephants,” as Phyllis said. And the rain stung sharply,
so that the way to the station was finished at a run. Then the rain fell
faster and harder, and beat slantwise against the windows of the booking
office and of the chill place that had General Waiting Room on its door.

“It's like being in a besieged castle,” Phyllis said; “look at the
arrows of the foe striking against the battlements!”

“It's much more like a great garden-squirt,” said Peter.

They decided to wait on the up side, for the down platform looked very
wet indeed, and the rain was driving right into the little bleak shelter
where down-passengers have to wait for their trains.

The hour would be full of incident and of interest, for there would be
two up trains and one down to look at before the one that should bring
Mother back.

“Perhaps it'll have stopped raining by then,” said Bobbie; “anyhow, I'm
glad I brought Mother's waterproof and umbrella.”

They went into the desert spot labelled General Waiting Room, and the
time passed pleasantly enough in a game of advertisements. You know the
game, of course? It is something like dumb Crambo. The players take
it in turns to go out, and then come back and look as like some
advertisement as they can, and the others have to guess what
advertisement it is meant to be. Bobbie came in and sat down under
Mother's umbrella and made a sharp face, and everyone knew she was the
fox who sits under the umbrella in the advertisement. Phyllis tried to
make a Magic Carpet of Mother's waterproof, but it would not stand out
stiff and raft-like as a Magic Carpet should, and nobody could guess
it. Everyone thought Peter was carrying things a little too far when he
blacked his face all over with coal-dust and struck a spidery attitude
and said he was the blot that advertises somebody's Blue Black Writing
Fluid.

It was Phyllis's turn again, and she was trying to look like the Sphinx
that advertises What's-his-name's Personally Conducted Tours up the Nile
when the sharp ting of the signal announced the up train. The children
rushed out to see it pass. On its engine were the particular driver
and fireman who were now numbered among the children's dearest friends.
Courtesies passed between them. Jim asked after the toy engine, and
Bobbie pressed on his acceptance a moist, greasy package of toffee that
she had made herself.

Charmed by this attention, the engine-driver consented to consider her
request that some day he would take Peter for a ride on the engine.

“Stand back, Mates,” cried the engine-driver, suddenly, “and horf she
goes.”

And sure enough, off the train went. The children watched the
tail-lights of the train till it disappeared round the curve of the
line, and then turned to go back to the dusty freedom of the General
Waiting Room and the joys of the advertisement game.

They expected to see just one or two people, the end of the procession
of passengers who had given up their tickets and gone away. Instead, the
platform round the door of the station had a dark blot round it, and the
dark blot was a crowd of people.

“Oh!” cried Peter, with a thrill of joyous excitement, “something's
happened! Come on!”

They ran down the platform. When they got to the crowd, they could, of
course, see nothing but the damp backs and elbows of the people on the
crowd's outside. Everybody was talking at once. It was evident that
something had happened.

“It's my belief he's nothing worse than a natural,” said a
farmerish-looking person. Peter saw his red, clean-shaven face as he
spoke.

“If you ask me, I should say it was a Police Court case,” said a young
man with a black bag.

“Not it; the Infirmary more like--”

Then the voice of the Station Master was heard, firm and official:--

“Now, then--move along there. I'll attend to this, if YOU please.”

But the crowd did not move. And then came a voice that thrilled the
children through and through. For it spoke in a foreign language. And,
what is more, it was a language that they had never heard. They had
heard French spoken and German. Aunt Emma knew German, and used to sing
a song about bedeuten and zeiten and bin and sin. Nor was it Latin.
Peter had been in Latin for four terms.

It was some comfort, anyhow, to find that none of the crowd understood
the foreign language any better than the children did.

“What's that he's saying?” asked the farmer, heavily.

“Sounds like French to me,” said the Station Master, who had once been
to Boulogne for the day.

“It isn't French!” cried Peter.

“What is it, then?” asked more than one voice. The crowd fell back a
little to see who had spoken, and Peter pressed forward, so that when
the crowd closed up again he was in the front rank.

“I don't know what it is,” said Peter, “but it isn't French. I know
that.” Then he saw what it was that the crowd had for its centre. It
was a man--the man, Peter did not doubt, who had spoken in that strange
tongue. A man with long hair and wild eyes, with shabby clothes of a cut
Peter had not seen before--a man whose hands and lips trembled, and who
spoke again as his eyes fell on Peter.

“No, it's not French,” said Peter.

“Try him with French if you know so much about it,” said the farmer-man.

“Parlay voo Frongsay?” began Peter, boldly, and the next moment the
crowd recoiled again, for the man with the wild eyes had left leaning
against the wall, and had sprung forward and caught Peter's hands,
and begun to pour forth a flood of words which, though he could not
understand a word of them, Peter knew the sound of.

“There!” said he, and turned, his hands still clasped in the hands of
the strange shabby figure, to throw a glance of triumph at the crowd;
“there; THAT'S French.”

“What does he say?”

“I don't know.” Peter was obliged to own it.

“Here,” said the Station Master again; “you move on if you please. I'LL
deal with this case.”

A few of the more timid or less inquisitive travellers moved slowly and
reluctantly away. And Phyllis and Bobbie got near to Peter. All three
had been TAUGHT French at school. How deeply they now wished that they
had LEARNED it! Peter shook his head at the stranger, but he also shook
his hands as warmly and looked at him as kindly as he could. A person
in the crowd, after some hesitation, said suddenly, “No comprenny!” and
then, blushing deeply, backed out of the press and went away.

“Take him into your room,” whispered Bobbie to the Station Master.
“Mother can talk French. She'll be here by the next train from
Maidbridge.”

The Station Master took the arm of the stranger, suddenly but not
unkindly. But the man wrenched his arm away, and cowered back coughing
and trembling and trying to push the Station Master away.

“Oh, don't!” said Bobbie; “don't you see how frightened he is? He thinks
you're going to shut him up. I know he does--look at his eyes!”

“They're like a fox's eyes when the beast's in a trap,” said the farmer.

“Oh, let me try!” Bobbie went on; “I do really know one or two French
words if I could only think of them.”

Sometimes, in moments of great need, we can do wonderful things--things
that in ordinary life we could hardly even dream of doing. Bobbie had
never been anywhere near the top of her French class, but she must have
learned something without knowing it, for now, looking at those wild,
hunted eyes, she actually remembered and, what is more, spoke, some
French words. She said:--

“Vous attendre. Ma mere parlez Francais. Nous--what's the French for
'being kind'?”

Nobody knew.

“Bong is 'good,'” said Phyllis.

“Nous etre bong pour vous.”

I do not know whether the man understood her words, but he understood
the touch of the hand she thrust into his, and the kindness of the other
hand that stroked his shabby sleeve.

She pulled him gently towards the inmost sanctuary of the Station
Master. The other children followed, and the Station Master shut the
door in the face of the crowd, which stood a little while in the booking
office talking and looking at the fast closed yellow door, and then by
ones and twos went its way, grumbling.

Inside the Station Master's room Bobbie still held the stranger's hand
and stroked his sleeve.

“Here's a go,” said the Station Master; “no ticket--doesn't even know
where he wants to go. I'm not sure now but what I ought to send for the
police.”

“Oh, DON'T!” all the children pleaded at once. And suddenly Bobbie
got between the others and the stranger, for she had seen that he was
crying.

By a most unusual piece of good fortune she had a handkerchief in
her pocket. By a still more uncommon accident the handkerchief was
moderately clean. Standing in front of the stranger, she got out the
handkerchief and passed it to him so that the others did not see.

“Wait till Mother comes,” Phyllis was saying; “she does speak French
beautifully. You'd just love to hear her.”

“I'm sure he hasn't done anything like you're sent to prison for,” said
Peter.

“Looks like without visible means to me,” said the Station Master.
“Well, I don't mind giving him the benefit of the doubt till your Mamma
comes. I SHOULD like to know what nation's got the credit of HIM, that I
should.”

Then Peter had an idea. He pulled an envelope out of his pocket, and
showed that it was half full of foreign stamps.

“Look here,” he said, “let's show him these--”

Bobbie looked and saw that the stranger had dried his eyes with her
handkerchief. So she said: “All right.”

They showed him an Italian stamp, and pointed from him to it and back
again, and made signs of question with their eyebrows. He shook his
head. Then they showed him a Norwegian stamp--the common blue kind it
was--and again he signed No. Then they showed him a Spanish one, and
at that he took the envelope from Peter's hand and searched among the
stamps with a hand that trembled. The hand that he reached out at last,
with a gesture as of one answering a question, contained a RUSSIAN
stamp.

“He's Russian,” cried Peter, “or else he's like 'the man who was'--in
Kipling, you know.”

The train from Maidbridge was signalled.

“I'll stay with him till you bring Mother in,” said Bobbie.

“You're not afraid, Missie?”

“Oh, no,” said Bobbie, looking at the stranger, as she might have looked
at a strange dog of doubtful temper. “You wouldn't hurt me, would you?”

She smiled at him, and he smiled back, a queer crooked smile. And then
he coughed again. And the heavy rattling swish of the incoming train
swept past, and the Station Master and Peter and Phyllis went out to
meet it. Bobbie was still holding the stranger's hand when they came
back with Mother.

The Russian rose and bowed very ceremoniously.

Then Mother spoke in French, and he replied, haltingly at first, but
presently in longer and longer sentences.

The children, watching his face and Mother's, knew that he was telling
her things that made her angry and pitying, and sorry and indignant all
at once.

“Well, Mum, what's it all about?” The Station Master could not restrain
his curiosity any longer.

“Oh,” said Mother, “it's all right. He's a Russian, and he's lost his
ticket. And I'm afraid he's very ill. If you don't mind, I'll take him
home with me now. He's really quite worn out. I'll run down and tell you
all about him to-morrow.”

“I hope you won't find you're taking home a frozen viper,” said the
Station Master, doubtfully.

“Oh, no,” Mother said brightly, and she smiled; “I'm quite sure I'm
not. Why, he's a great man in his own country, writes books--beautiful
books--I've read some of them; but I'll tell you all about it
to-morrow.”

She spoke again in French to the Russian, and everyone could see the
surprise and pleasure and gratitude in his eyes. He got up and politely
bowed to the Station Master, and offered his arm most ceremoniously to
Mother. She took it, but anybody could have seen that she was helping
him along, and not he her.

“You girls run home and light a fire in the sitting-room,” Mother said,
“and Peter had better go for the Doctor.”

But it was Bobbie who went for the Doctor.

“I hate to tell you,” she said breathlessly when she came upon him
in his shirt sleeves, weeding his pansy-bed, “but Mother's got a very
shabby Russian, and I'm sure he'll have to belong to your Club. I'm
certain he hasn't got any money. We found him at the station.”

“Found him! Was he lost, then?” asked the Doctor, reaching for his coat.

“Yes,” said Bobbie, unexpectedly, “that's just what he was. He's been
telling Mother the sad, sweet story of his life in French; and she said
would you be kind enough to come directly if you were at home. He has a
dreadful cough, and he's been crying.”

The Doctor smiled.

“Oh, don't,” said Bobbie; “please don't. You wouldn't if you'd seen him.
I never saw a man cry before. You don't know what it's like.”

Dr. Forrest wished then that he hadn't smiled.

When Bobbie and the Doctor got to Three Chimneys, the Russian was
sitting in the arm-chair that had been Father's, stretching his feet
to the blaze of a bright wood fire, and sipping the tea Mother had made
him.

“The man seems worn out, mind and body,” was what the Doctor said; “the
cough's bad, but there's nothing that can't be cured. He ought to go
straight to bed, though--and let him have a fire at night.”

“I'll make one in my room; it's the only one with a fireplace,” said
Mother. She did, and presently the Doctor helped the stranger to bed.

There was a big black trunk in Mother's room that none of the children
had ever seen unlocked. Now, when she had lighted the fire, she unlocked
it and took some clothes out--men's clothes--and set them to air by the
newly lighted fire. Bobbie, coming in with more wood for the fire, saw
the mark on the night-shirt, and looked over to the open trunk. All
the things she could see were men's clothes. And the name marked on the
shirt was Father's name. Then Father hadn't taken his clothes with him.
And that night-shirt was one of Father's new ones. Bobbie remembered its
being made, just before Peter's birthday. Why hadn't Father taken his
clothes? Bobbie slipped from the room. As she went she heard the key
turned in the lock of the trunk. Her heart was beating horribly. WHY
hadn't Father taken his clothes? When Mother came out of the room,
Bobbie flung tightly clasping arms round her waist, and whispered:--

“Mother--Daddy isn't--isn't DEAD, is he?”

“My darling, no! What made you think of anything so horrible?”

“I--I don't know,” said Bobbie, angry with herself, but still clinging
to that resolution of hers, not to see anything that Mother didn't mean
her to see.

Mother gave her a hurried hug. “Daddy was quite, QUITE well when I heard
from him last,” she said, “and he'll come back to us some day. Don't
fancy such horrible things, darling!”

Later on, when the Russian stranger had been made comfortable for the
night, Mother came into the girls' room. She was to sleep there in
Phyllis's bed, and Phyllis was to have a mattress on the floor, a
most amusing adventure for Phyllis. Directly Mother came in, two white
figures started up, and two eager voices called:--

“Now, Mother, tell us all about the Russian gentleman.”

A white shape hopped into the room. It was Peter, dragging his quilt
behind him like the tail of a white peacock.

“We have been patient,” he said, “and I had to bite my tongue not to
go to sleep, and I just nearly went to sleep and I bit too hard, and it
hurts ever so. DO tell us. Make a nice long story of it.”

“I can't make a long story of it to-night,” said Mother; “I'm very
tired.”

Bobbie knew by her voice that Mother had been crying, but the others
didn't know.

“Well, make it as long as you can,” said Phil, and Bobbie got her arms
round Mother's waist and snuggled close to her.

“Well, it's a story long enough to make a whole book of. He's a writer;
he's written beautiful books. In Russia at the time of the Czar one
dared not say anything about the rich people doing wrong, or about the
things that ought to be done to make poor people better and happier. If
one did one was sent to prison.”

“But they CAN'T,” said Peter; “people only go to prison when they've
done wrong.”

“Or when the Judges THINK they've done wrong,” said Mother. “Yes, that's
so in England. But in Russia it was different. And he wrote a beautiful
book about poor people and how to help them. I've read it. There's
nothing in it but goodness and kindness. And they sent him to prison for
it. He was three years in a horrible dungeon, with hardly any light, and
all damp and dreadful. In prison all alone for three years.”

Mother's voice trembled a little and stopped suddenly.

“But, Mother,” said Peter, “that can't be true NOW. It sounds like
something out of a history book--the Inquisition, or something.”

“It WAS true,” said Mother; “it's all horribly true. Well, then they
took him out and sent him to Siberia, a convict chained to other
convicts--wicked men who'd done all sorts of crimes--a long chain of
them, and they walked, and walked, and walked, for days and weeks, till
he thought they'd never stop walking. And overseers went behind them
with whips--yes, whips--to beat them if they got tired. And some of them
went lame, and some fell down, and when they couldn't get up and go on,
they beat them, and then left them to die. Oh, it's all too terrible!
And at last he got to the mines, and he was condemned to stay there for
life--for life, just for writing a good, noble, splendid book.”

“How did he get away?”

“When the war came, some of the Russian prisoners were allowed to
volunteer as soldiers. And he volunteered. But he deserted at the first
chance he got and--”

“But that's very cowardly, isn't it”--said Peter--“to desert? Especially
when it's war.”

“Do you think he owed anything to a country that had done THAT to him?
If he did, he owed more to his wife and children. He didn't know what
had become of them.”

“Oh,” cried Bobbie, “he had THEM to think about and be miserable about
TOO, then, all the time he was in prison?”

“Yes, he had them to think about and be miserable about all the time he
was in prison. For anything he knew they might have been sent to prison,
too. They did those things in Russia. But while he was in the mines some
friends managed to get a message to him that his wife and children had
escaped and come to England. So when he deserted he came here to look
for them.”

“Had he got their address?” said practical Peter.

“No; just England. He was going to London, and he thought he had to
change at our station, and then he found he'd lost his ticket and his
purse.”

“Oh, DO you think he'll find them?--I mean his wife and children, not
the ticket and things.”

“I hope so. Oh, I hope and pray that he'll find his wife and children
again.”

Even Phyllis now perceived that mother's voice was very unsteady.

“Why, Mother,” she said, “how very sorry you seem to be for him!”

Mother didn't answer for a minute. Then she just said, “Yes,” and then
she seemed to be thinking. The children were quiet.

Presently she said, “Dears, when you say your prayers, I think you might
ask God to show His pity upon all prisoners and captives.”

“To show His pity,” Bobbie repeated slowly, “upon all prisoners and
captives. Is that right, Mother?”

“Yes,” said Mother, “upon all prisoners and captives. All prisoners and
captives.”



Chapter VI. Saviours of the train.


The Russian gentleman was better the next day, and the day after that
better still, and on the third day he was well enough to come into the
garden. A basket chair was put for him and he sat there, dressed in
clothes of Father's which were too big for him. But when Mother had
hemmed up the ends of the sleeves and the trousers, the clothes did
well enough. His was a kind face now that it was no longer tired and
frightened, and he smiled at the children whenever he saw them. They
wished very much that he could speak English. Mother wrote several
letters to people she thought might know whereabouts in England a
Russian gentleman's wife and family might possibly be; not to the people
she used to know before she came to live at Three Chimneys--she never
wrote to any of them--but strange people--Members of Parliament and
Editors of papers, and Secretaries of Societies.

And she did not do much of her story-writing, only corrected proofs as
she sat in the sun near the Russian, and talked to him every now and
then.

The children wanted very much to show how kindly they felt to this man
who had been sent to prison and to Siberia just for writing a beautiful
book about poor people. They could smile at him, of course; they could
and they did. But if you smile too constantly, the smile is apt to
get fixed like the smile of the hyaena. And then it no longer looks
friendly, but simply silly. So they tried other ways, and brought him
flowers till the place where he sat was surrounded by little fading
bunches of clover and roses and Canterbury bells.

And then Phyllis had an idea. She beckoned mysteriously to the others
and drew them into the back yard, and there, in a concealed spot,
between the pump and the water-butt, she said:--

“You remember Perks promising me the very first strawberries out of his
own garden?” Perks, you will recollect, was the Porter. “Well, I should
think they're ripe now. Let's go down and see.”

Mother had been down as she had promised to tell the Station Master the
story of the Russian Prisoner. But even the charms of the railway had
been unable to tear the children away from the neighbourhood of the
interesting stranger. So they had not been to the station for three
days.

They went now.

And, to their surprise and distress, were very coldly received by Perks.

“'Ighly honoured, I'm sure,” he said when they peeped in at the door of
the Porters' room. And he went on reading his newspaper.

There was an uncomfortable silence.

“Oh, dear,” said Bobbie, with a sigh, “I do believe you're CROSS.”

“What, me? Not me!” said Perks loftily; “it ain't nothing to me.”

“What AIN'T nothing to you?” said Peter, too anxious and alarmed to
change the form of words.

“Nothing ain't nothing. What 'appens either 'ere or elsewhere,” said
Perks; “if you likes to 'ave your secrets, 'ave 'em and welcome. That's
what I say.”

The secret-chamber of each heart was rapidly examined during the pause
that followed. Three heads were shaken.

“We haven't got any secrets from YOU,” said Bobbie at last.

“Maybe you 'ave, and maybe you 'aven't,” said Perks; “it ain't nothing
to me. And I wish you all a very good afternoon.” He held up the paper
between him and them and went on reading.

“Oh, DON'T!” said Phyllis, in despair; “this is truly dreadful! Whatever
it is, do tell us.”

“We didn't mean to do it whatever it was.”

No answer. The paper was refolded and Perks began on another column.

“Look here,” said Peter, suddenly, “it's not fair. Even people who do
crimes aren't punished without being told what it's for--as once they
were in Russia.”

“I don't know nothing about Russia.”

“Oh, yes, you do, when Mother came down on purpose to tell you and Mr.
Gills all about OUR Russian.”

“Can't you fancy it?” said Perks, indignantly; “don't you see 'im
a-asking of me to step into 'is room and take a chair and listen to what
'er Ladyship 'as to say?”

“Do you mean to say you've not heard?”

“Not so much as a breath. I did go so far as to put a question. And he
shuts me up like a rat-trap. 'Affairs of State, Perks,' says he. But I
did think one o' you would 'a' nipped down to tell me--you're here sharp
enough when you want to get anything out of old Perks”--Phyllis
flushed purple as she thought of the strawberries--“information about
locomotives or signals or the likes,” said Perks.

“We didn't know you didn't know.”

“We thought Mother had told you.”

“Wewantedtotellyouonlywethoughtitwouldbestalenews.”

The three spoke all at once.

Perks said it was all very well, and still held up the paper. Then
Phyllis suddenly snatched it away, and threw her arms round his neck.

“Oh, let's kiss and be friends,” she said; “we'll say we're sorry first,
if you like, but we didn't really know that you didn't know.”

“We are so sorry,” said the others.

And Perks at last consented to accept their apologies.

Then they got him to come out and sit in the sun on the green Railway
Bank, where the grass was quite hot to touch, and there, sometimes
speaking one at a time, and sometimes all together, they told the Porter
the story of the Russian Prisoner.

“Well, I must say,” said Perks; but he did not say it--whatever it was.

“Yes, it is pretty awful, isn't it?” said Peter, “and I don't wonder you
were curious about who the Russian was.”

“I wasn't curious, not so much as interested,” said the Porter.

“Well, I do think Mr. Gills might have told you about it. It was horrid
of him.”

“I don't keep no down on 'im for that, Missie,” said the Porter; “cos
why? I see 'is reasons. 'E wouldn't want to give away 'is own side with
a tale like that 'ere. It ain't human nature. A man's got to stand
up for his own side whatever they does. That's what it means by Party
Politics. I should 'a' done the same myself if that long-'aired chap 'ad
'a' been a Jap.”

“But the Japs didn't do cruel, wicked things like that,” said Bobbie.

“P'r'aps not,” said Perks, cautiously; “still you can't be sure with
foreigners. My own belief is they're all tarred with the same brush.”

“Then why were you on the side of the Japs?” Peter asked.

“Well, you see, you must take one side or the other. Same as with
Liberals and Conservatives. The great thing is to take your side and
then stick to it, whatever happens.”

A signal sounded.

“There's the 3.14 up,” said Perks. “You lie low till she's through,
and then we'll go up along to my place, and see if there's any of them
strawberries ripe what I told you about.”

“If there are any ripe, and you DO give them to me,” said Phyllis, “you
won't mind if I give them to the poor Russian, will you?”

Perks narrowed his eyes and then raised his eyebrows.

“So it was them strawberries you come down for this afternoon, eh?” said
he.

This was an awkward moment for Phyllis. To say “yes” would seem rude and
greedy, and unkind to Perks. But she knew if she said “no,” she would
not be pleased with herself afterwards. So--

“Yes,” she said, “it was.”

“Well done!” said the Porter; “speak the truth and shame the--”

“But we'd have come down the very next day if we'd known you hadn't
heard the story,” Phyllis added hastily.

“I believe you, Missie,” said Perks, and sprang across the line six feet
in front of the advancing train.

The girls hated to see him do this, but Peter liked it. It was so
exciting.

The Russian gentleman was so delighted with the strawberries that the
three racked their brains to find some other surprise for him. But all
the racking did not bring out any idea more novel than wild cherries.
And this idea occurred to them next morning. They had seen the blossom
on the trees in the spring, and they knew where to look for wild
cherries now that cherry time was here. The trees grew all up and along
the rocky face of the cliff out of which the mouth of the tunnel opened.
There were all sorts of trees there, birches and beeches and baby oaks
and hazels, and among them the cherry blossom had shone like snow and
silver.

The mouth of the tunnel was some way from Three Chimneys, so Mother let
them take their lunch with them in a basket. And the basket would do
to bring the cherries back in if they found any. She also lent them her
silver watch so that they should not be late for tea. Peter's Waterbury
had taken it into its head not to go since the day when Peter dropped it
into the water-butt. And they started. When they got to the top of the
cutting, they leaned over the fence and looked down to where the railway
lines lay at the bottom of what, as Phyllis said, was exactly like a
mountain gorge.

“If it wasn't for the railway at the bottom, it would be as though the
foot of man had never been there, wouldn't it?”

The sides of the cutting were of grey stone, very roughly hewn. Indeed,
the top part of the cutting had been a little natural glen that had been
cut deeper to bring it down to the level of the tunnel's mouth. Among
the rocks, grass and flowers grew, and seeds dropped by birds in the
crannies of the stone had taken root and grown into bushes and trees
that overhung the cutting. Near the tunnel was a flight of steps leading
down to the line--just wooden bars roughly fixed into the earth--a very
steep and narrow way, more like a ladder than a stair.

“We'd better get down,” said Peter; “I'm sure the cherries would be
quite easy to get at from the side of the steps. You remember it was
there we picked the cherry blossoms that we put on the rabbit's grave.”

So they went along the fence towards the little swing gate that is at
the top of these steps. And they were almost at the gate when Bobbie
said:--

“Hush. Stop! What's that?”

“That” was a very odd noise indeed--a soft noise, but quite plainly to
be heard through the sound of the wind in tree branches, and the hum
and whir of the telegraph wires. It was a sort of rustling, whispering
sound. As they listened it stopped, and then it began again.

And this time it did not stop, but it grew louder and more rustling and
rumbling.

“Look”--cried Peter, suddenly--“the tree over there!”

The tree he pointed at was one of those that have rough grey leaves and
white flowers. The berries, when they come, are bright scarlet, but if
you pick them, they disappoint you by turning black before you get them
home. And, as Peter pointed, the tree was moving--not just the way trees
ought to move when the wind blows through them, but all in one piece,
as though it were a live creature and were walking down the side of the
cutting.

“It's moving!” cried Bobbie. “Oh, look! and so are the others. It's like
the woods in Macbeth.”

“It's magic,” said Phyllis, breathlessly. “I always knew this railway
was enchanted.”

It really did seem a little like magic. For all the trees for about
twenty yards of the opposite bank seemed to be slowly walking down
towards the railway line, the tree with the grey leaves bringing up the
rear like some old shepherd driving a flock of green sheep.

“What is it? Oh, what is it?” said Phyllis; “it's much too magic for me.
I don't like it. Let's go home.”

But Bobbie and Peter clung fast to the rail and watched breathlessly.
And Phyllis made no movement towards going home by herself.

The trees moved on and on. Some stones and loose earth fell down and
rattled on the railway metals far below.

“It's ALL coming down,” Peter tried to say, but he found there was
hardly any voice to say it with. And, indeed, just as he spoke, the
great rock, on the top of which the walking trees were, leaned slowly
forward. The trees, ceasing to walk, stood still and shivered. Leaning
with the rock, they seemed to hesitate a moment, and then rock and trees
and grass and bushes, with a rushing sound, slipped right away from the
face of the cutting and fell on the line with a blundering crash that
could have been heard half a mile off. A cloud of dust rose up.

“Oh,” said Peter, in awestruck tones, “isn't it exactly like when coals
come in?--if there wasn't any roof to the cellar and you could see
down.”

“Look what a great mound it's made!” said Bobbie.

“Yes,” said Peter, slowly. He was still leaning on the fence. “Yes,” he
said again, still more slowly.

Then he stood upright.

“The 11.29 down hasn't gone by yet. We must let them know at the
station, or there'll be a most frightful accident.”

“Let's run,” said Bobbie, and began.

But Peter cried, “Come back!” and looked at Mother's watch. He was very
prompt and businesslike, and his face looked whiter than they had ever
seen it.

“No time,” he said; “it's two miles away, and it's past eleven.”

“Couldn't we,” suggested Phyllis, breathlessly, “couldn't we climb up a
telegraph post and do something to the wires?”

“We don't know how,” said Peter.

“They do it in war,” said Phyllis; “I know I've heard of it.”

“They only CUT them, silly,” said Peter, “and that doesn't do any good.
And we couldn't cut them even if we got up, and we couldn't get up. If
we had anything red, we could get down on the line and wave it.”

“But the train wouldn't see us till it got round the corner, and then it
could see the mound just as well as us,” said Phyllis; “better, because
it's much bigger than us.”

“If we only had something red,” Peter repeated, “we could go round the
corner and wave to the train.”

“We might wave, anyway.”

“They'd only think it was just US, as usual. We've waved so often
before. Anyway, let's get down.”

They got down the steep stairs. Bobbie was pale and shivering. Peter's
face looked thinner than usual. Phyllis was red-faced and damp with
anxiety.

“Oh, how hot I am!” she said; “and I thought it was going to be cold; I
wish we hadn't put on our--” she stopped short, and then ended in quite
a different tone--“our flannel petticoats.”

Bobbie turned at the bottom of the stairs.

“Oh, yes,” she cried; “THEY'RE red! Let's take them off.”

They did, and with the petticoats rolled up under their arms, ran along
the railway, skirting the newly fallen mound of stones and rock and
earth, and bent, crushed, twisted trees. They ran at their best pace.
Peter led, but the girls were not far behind. They reached the corner
that hid the mound from the straight line of railway that ran half a
mile without curve or corner.

“Now,” said Peter, taking hold of the largest flannel petticoat.

“You're not”--Phyllis faltered--“you're not going to TEAR them?”

“Shut up,” said Peter, with brief sternness.

“Oh, yes,” said Bobbie, “tear them into little bits if you like. Don't
you see, Phil, if we can't stop the train, there'll be a real live
accident, with people KILLED. Oh, horrible! Here, Peter, you'll never
tear it through the band!”

She took the red flannel petticoat from him and tore it off an inch from
the band. Then she tore the other in the same way.

“There!” said Peter, tearing in his turn. He divided each petticoat into
three pieces. “Now, we've got six flags.” He looked at the watch again.
“And we've got seven minutes. We must have flagstaffs.”

The knives given to boys are, for some odd reason, seldom of the kind
of steel that keeps sharp. The young saplings had to be broken off. Two
came up by the roots. The leaves were stripped from them.

“We must cut holes in the flags, and run the sticks through the holes,”
 said Peter. And the holes were cut. The knife was sharp enough to cut
flannel with. Two of the flags were set up in heaps of loose stones
between the sleepers of the down line. Then Phyllis and Roberta took
each a flag, and stood ready to wave it as soon as the train came in
sight.

“I shall have the other two myself,” said Peter, “because it was my idea
to wave something red.”

“They're our petticoats, though,” Phyllis was beginning, but Bobbie
interrupted--

“Oh, what does it matter who waves what, if we can only save the train?”

Perhaps Peter had not rightly calculated the number of minutes it would
take the 11.29 to get from the station to the place where they were, or
perhaps the train was late. Anyway, it seemed a very long time that they
waited.

Phyllis grew impatient. “I expect the watch is wrong, and the train's
gone by,” said she.

Peter relaxed the heroic attitude he had chosen to show off his two
flags. And Bobbie began to feel sick with suspense.

It seemed to her that they had been standing there for hours and hours,
holding those silly little red flannel flags that no one would ever
notice. The train wouldn't care. It would go rushing by them and tear
round the corner and go crashing into that awful mound. And everyone
would be killed. Her hands grew very cold and trembled so that she could
hardly hold the flag. And then came the distant rumble and hum of the
metals, and a puff of white steam showed far away along the stretch of
line.

“Stand firm,” said Peter, “and wave like mad! When it gets to that
big furze bush step back, but go on waving! Don't stand ON the line,
Bobbie!”

The train came rattling along very, very fast.

“They don't see us! They won't see us! It's all no good!” cried Bobbie.

The two little flags on the line swayed as the nearing train shook and
loosened the heaps of loose stones that held them up. One of them slowly
leaned over and fell on the line. Bobbie jumped forward and caught it
up, and waved it; her hands did not tremble now.

It seemed that the train came on as fast as ever. It was very near now.

“Keep off the line, you silly cuckoo!” said Peter, fiercely.

“It's no good,” Bobbie said again.

“Stand back!” cried Peter, suddenly, and he dragged Phyllis back by the
arm.

But Bobbie cried, “Not yet, not yet!” and waved her two flags right over
the line. The front of the engine looked black and enormous. Its voice
was loud and harsh.

“Oh, stop, stop, stop!” cried Bobbie. No one heard her. At least Peter
and Phyllis didn't, for the oncoming rush of the train covered the sound
of her voice with a mountain of sound. But afterwards she used to wonder
whether the engine itself had not heard her. It seemed almost as though
it had--for it slackened swiftly, slackened and stopped, not twenty
yards from the place where Bobbie's two flags waved over the line. She
saw the great black engine stop dead, but somehow she could not stop
waving the flags. And when the driver and the fireman had got off the
engine and Peter and Phyllis had gone to meet them and pour out their
excited tale of the awful mound just round the corner, Bobbie still
waved the flags but more and more feebly and jerkily.

When the others turned towards her she was lying across the line with
her hands flung forward and still gripping the sticks of the little red
flannel flags.

The engine-driver picked her up, carried her to the train, and laid her
on the cushions of a first-class carriage.

“Gone right off in a faint,” he said, “poor little woman. And no wonder.
I'll just 'ave a look at this 'ere mound of yours, and then we'll run
you back to the station and get her seen to.”

It was horrible to see Bobbie lying so white and quiet, with her lips
blue, and parted.

“I believe that's what people look like when they're dead,” whispered
Phyllis.

“DON'T!” said Peter, sharply.

They sat by Bobbie on the blue cushions, and the train ran back. Before
it reached their station Bobbie had sighed and opened her eyes,
and rolled herself over and begun to cry. This cheered the others
wonderfully. They had seen her cry before, but they had never seen her
faint, nor anyone else, for the matter of that. They had not known what
to do when she was fainting, but now she was only crying they could
thump her on the back and tell her not to, just as they always did. And
presently, when she stopped crying, they were able to laugh at her for
being such a coward as to faint.

When the station was reached, the three were the heroes of an agitated
meeting on the platform.

The praises they got for their “prompt action,” their “common sense,”
 their “ingenuity,” were enough to have turned anybody's head. Phyllis
enjoyed herself thoroughly. She had never been a real heroine before,
and the feeling was delicious. Peter's ears got very red. Yet he, too,
enjoyed himself. Only Bobbie wished they all wouldn't. She wanted to get
away.

“You'll hear from the Company about this, I expect,” said the Station
Master.

Bobbie wished she might never hear of it again. She pulled at Peter's
jacket.

“Oh, come away, come away! I want to go home,” she said.

So they went. And as they went Station Master and Porter and guards and
driver and fireman and passengers sent up a cheer.

“Oh, listen,” cried Phyllis; “that's for US!”

“Yes,” said Peter. “I say, I am glad I thought about something red, and
waving it.”

“How lucky we DID put on our red flannel petticoats!” said Phyllis.

Bobbie said nothing. She was thinking of the horrible mound, and the
trustful train rushing towards it.

“And it was US that saved them,” said Peter.

“How dreadful if they had all been killed!” said Phyllis; “wouldn't it,
Bobbie?”

“We never got any cherries, after all,” said Bobbie.

The others thought her rather heartless.



Chapter VII. For valour.


I hope you don't mind my telling you a good deal about Roberta. The fact
is I am growing very fond of her. The more I observe her the more I love
her. And I notice all sorts of things about her that I like.

For instance, she was quite oddly anxious to make other people happy.
And she could keep a secret, a tolerably rare accomplishment. Also she
had the power of silent sympathy. That sounds rather dull, I know, but
it's not so dull as it sounds. It just means that a person is able
to know that you are unhappy, and to love you extra on that account,
without bothering you by telling you all the time how sorry she is
for you. That was what Bobbie was like. She knew that Mother was
unhappy--and that Mother had not told her the reason. So she just loved
Mother more and never said a single word that could let Mother know how
earnestly her little girl wondered what Mother was unhappy about. This
needs practice. It is not so easy as you might think.

Whatever happened--and all sorts of nice, pleasant ordinary things
happened--such as picnics, games, and buns for tea, Bobbie always had
these thoughts at the back of her mind. “Mother's unhappy. Why? I don't
know. She doesn't want me to know. I won't try to find out. But she
IS unhappy. Why? I don't know. She doesn't--” and so on, repeating and
repeating like a tune that you don't know the stopping part of.

The Russian gentleman still took up a good deal of everybody's thoughts.
All the editors and secretaries of Societies and Members of Parliament
had answered Mother's letters as politely as they knew how; but none of
them could tell where the wife and children of Mr. Szezcpansky would be
likely to be. (Did I tell you that the Russian's very Russian name was
that?)

Bobbie had another quality which you will hear differently described
by different people. Some of them call it interfering in other people's
business--and some call it “helping lame dogs over stiles,” and some
call it “loving-kindness.” It just means trying to help people.

She racked her brains to think of some way of helping the Russian
gentleman to find his wife and children. He had learned a few words
of English now. He could say “Good morning,” and “Good night,” and
“Please,” and “Thank you,” and “Pretty,” when the children brought him
flowers, and “Ver' good,” when they asked him how he had slept.

The way he smiled when he “said his English,” was, Bobbie felt, “just
too sweet for anything.” She used to think of his face because she
fancied it would help her to some way of helping him. But it did not.
Yet his being there cheered her because she saw that it made Mother
happier.

“She likes to have someone to be good to, even beside us,” said Bobbie.
“And I know she hated to let him have Father's clothes. But I suppose it
'hurt nice,' or she wouldn't have.”

For many and many a night after the day when she and Peter and Phyllis
had saved the train from wreck by waving their little red flannel flags,
Bobbie used to wake screaming and shivering, seeing again that horrible
mound, and the poor, dear trustful engine rushing on towards it--just
thinking that it was doing its swift duty, and that everything was clear
and safe. And then a warm thrill of pleasure used to run through her
at the remembrance of how she and Peter and Phyllis and the red flannel
petticoats had really saved everybody.

One morning a letter came. It was addressed to Peter and Bobbie and
Phyllis. They opened it with enthusiastic curiosity, for they did not
often get letters.

The letter said:--

“Dear Sir, and Ladies,--It is proposed to make a small presentation to
you, in commemoration of your prompt and courageous action in warning
the train on the --- inst., and thus averting what must, humanly
speaking, have been a terrible accident. The presentation will take
place at the --- Station at three o'clock on the 30th inst., if this
time and place will be convenient to you.

          “Yours faithfully,

                    “Jabez Inglewood.
“Secretary, Great Northern and Southern Railway Co.”

There never had been a prouder moment in the lives of the three
children. They rushed to Mother with the letter, and she also felt proud
and said so, and this made the children happier than ever.

“But if the presentation is money, you must say, 'Thank you, but we'd
rather not take it,'” said Mother. “I'll wash your Indian muslins at
once,” she added. “You must look tidy on an occasion like this.”

“Phil and I can wash them,” said Bobbie, “if you'll iron them, Mother.”

Washing is rather fun. I wonder whether you've ever done it? This
particular washing took place in the back kitchen, which had a stone
floor and a very big stone sink under its window.

“Let's put the bath on the sink,” said Phyllis; “then we can pretend
we're out-of-doors washerwomen like Mother saw in France.”

“But they were washing in the cold river,” said Peter, his hands in his
pockets, “not in hot water.”

“This is a HOT river, then,” said Phyllis; “lend a hand with the bath,
there's a dear.”

“I should like to see a deer lending a hand,” said Peter, but he lent
his.

“Now to rub and scrub and scrub and rub,” said Phyllis, hopping joyously
about as Bobbie carefully carried the heavy kettle from the kitchen
fire.

“Oh, no!” said Bobbie, greatly shocked; “you don't rub muslin. You put
the boiled soap in the hot water and make it all frothy-lathery--and
then you shake the muslin and squeeze it, ever so gently, and all the
dirt comes out. It's only clumsy things like tablecloths and sheets that
have to be rubbed.”

The lilac and the Gloire de Dijon roses outside the window swayed in the
soft breeze.

“It's a nice drying day--that's one thing,” said Bobbie, feeling very
grown up. “Oh, I do wonder what wonderful feelings we shall have when we
WEAR the Indian muslin dresses!”

“Yes, so do I,” said Phyllis, shaking and squeezing the muslin in quite
a professional manner.

“NOW we squeeze out the soapy water. NO--we mustn't twist them--and then
rinse them. I'll hold them while you and Peter empty the bath and get
clean water.”

“A presentation! That means presents,” said Peter, as his sisters,
having duly washed the pegs and wiped the line, hung up the dresses to
dry. “Whatever will it be?”

“It might be anything,” said Phyllis; “what I've always wanted is a Baby
elephant--but I suppose they wouldn't know that.”

“Suppose it was gold models of steam-engines?” said Bobbie.

“Or a big model of the scene of the prevented accident,” suggested
Peter, “with a little model train, and dolls dressed like us and the
engine-driver and fireman and passengers.”

“Do you LIKE,” said Bobbie, doubtfully, drying her hands on the rough
towel that hung on a roller at the back of the scullery door, “do you
LIKE us being rewarded for saving a train?”

“Yes, I do,” said Peter, downrightly; “and don't you try to come it over
us that you don't like it, too. Because I know you do.”

“Yes,” said Bobbie, doubtfully, “I know I do. But oughtn't we to be
satisfied with just having done it, and not ask for anything more?”

“Who did ask for anything more, silly?” said her brother; “Victoria
Cross soldiers don't ASK for it; but they're glad enough to get it all
the same. Perhaps it'll be medals. Then, when I'm very old indeed, I
shall show them to my grandchildren and say, 'We only did our duty,' and
they'll be awfully proud of me.”

“You have to be married,” warned Phyllis, “or you don't have any
grandchildren.”

“I suppose I shall HAVE to be married some day,” said Peter, “but it
will be an awful bother having her round all the time. I'd like to marry
a lady who had trances, and only woke up once or twice a year.”

“Just to say you were the light of her life and then go to sleep again.
Yes. That wouldn't be bad,” said Bobbie.

“When _I_ get married,” said Phyllis, “I shall want him to want me to be
awake all the time, so that I can hear him say how nice I am.”

“I think it would be nice,” said Bobbie, “to marry someone very poor,
and then you'd do all the work and he'd love you most frightfully, and
see the blue wood smoke curling up among the trees from the domestic
hearth as he came home from work every night. I say--we've got to answer
that letter and say that the time and place WILL be convenient to us.
There's the soap, Peter. WE'RE both as clean as clean. That pink box of
writing paper you had on your birthday, Phil.”

It took some time to arrange what should be said. Mother had gone back
to her writing, and several sheets of pink paper with scalloped gilt
edges and green four-leaved shamrocks in the corner were spoiled before
the three had decided what to say. Then each made a copy and signed it
with its own name.

The threefold letter ran:--

“Dear Mr. Jabez Inglewood,--Thank you very much. We did not want to be
rewarded but only to save the train, but we are glad you think so and
thank you very much. The time and place you say will be quite convenient
to us. Thank you very much.

          “Your affecate little friend,”

Then came the name, and after it:--

“P.S. Thank you very much.”

“Washing is much easier than ironing,” said Bobbie, taking the clean dry
dresses off the line. “I do love to see things come clean. Oh--I don't
know how we shall wait till it's time to know what presentation they're
going to present!”

When at last--it seemed a very long time after--it was THE day,
the three children went down to the station at the proper time. And
everything that happened was so odd that it seemed like a dream. The
Station Master came out to meet them--in his best clothes, as Peter
noticed at once--and led them into the waiting room where once they had
played the advertisement game. It looked quite different now. A carpet
had been put down--and there were pots of roses on the mantelpiece and
on the window ledges--green branches stuck up, like holly and laurel
are at Christmas, over the framed advertisement of Cook's Tours and the
Beauties of Devon and the Paris Lyons Railway. There were quite a
number of people there besides the Porter--two or three ladies in
smart dresses, and quite a crowd of gentlemen in high hats and frock
coats--besides everybody who belonged to the station. They recognized
several people who had been in the train on the red-flannel-petticoat
day. Best of all their own old gentleman was there, and his coat and hat
and collar seemed more than ever different from anyone else's. He shook
hands with them and then everybody sat down on chairs, and a gentleman
in spectacles--they found out afterwards that he was the District
Superintendent--began quite a long speech--very clever indeed. I am not
going to write the speech down. First, because you would think it dull;
and secondly, because it made all the children blush so, and get so hot
about the ears that I am quite anxious to get away from this part of the
subject; and thirdly, because the gentleman took so many words to say
what he had to say that I really haven't time to write them down. He
said all sorts of nice things about the children's bravery and presence
of mind, and when he had done he sat down, and everyone who was there
clapped and said, “Hear, hear.”

And then the old gentleman got up and said things, too. It was very like
a prize-giving. And then he called the children one by one, by their
names, and gave each of them a beautiful gold watch and chain. And
inside the watches were engraved after the name of the watch's new
owner:--

“From the Directors of the Northern and Southern Railway in grateful
recognition of the courageous and prompt action which averted an
accident on --- 1905.”

The watches were the most beautiful you can possibly imagine, and each
one had a blue leather case to live in when it was at home.

“You must make a speech now and thank everyone for their kindness,”
 whispered the Station Master in Peter's ear and pushed him forward.
“Begin 'Ladies and Gentlemen,'” he added.

Each of the children had already said “Thank you,” quite properly.

“Oh, dear,” said Peter, but he did not resist the push.

“Ladies and Gentlemen,” he said in a rather husky voice. Then there
was a pause, and he heard his heart beating in his throat. “Ladies and
Gentlemen,” he went on with a rush, “it's most awfully good of you, and
we shall treasure the watches all our lives--but really we don't deserve
it because what we did wasn't anything, really. At least, I mean it
was awfully exciting, and what I mean to say--thank you all very, very
much.”

The people clapped Peter more than they had done the District
Superintendent, and then everybody shook hands with them, and as soon as
politeness would let them, they got away, and tore up the hill to Three
Chimneys with their watches in their hands.

It was a wonderful day--the kind of day that very seldom happens to
anybody and to most of us not at all.

“I did want to talk to the old gentleman about something else,” said
Bobbie, “but it was so public--like being in church.”

“What did you want to say?” asked Phyllis.

“I'll tell you when I've thought about it more,” said Bobbie.

So when she had thought a little more she wrote a letter.

“My dearest old gentleman,” it said; “I want most awfully to ask you
something. If you could get out of the train and go by the next, it
would do. I do not want you to give me anything. Mother says we ought
not to. And besides, we do not want any THINGS. Only to talk to you
about a Prisoner and Captive. Your loving little friend,

          “Bobbie.”

She got the Station Master to give the letter to the old gentleman, and
next day she asked Peter and Phyllis to come down to the station with
her at the time when the train that brought the old gentleman from town
would be passing through.

She explained her idea to them--and they approved thoroughly.

They had all washed their hands and faces, and brushed their hair, and
were looking as tidy as they knew how. But Phyllis, always unlucky, had
upset a jug of lemonade down the front of her dress. There was no time
to change--and the wind happening to blow from the coal yard, her frock
was soon powdered with grey, which stuck to the sticky lemonade stains
and made her look, as Peter said, “like any little gutter child.”

It was decided that she should keep behind the others as much as
possible.

“Perhaps the old gentleman won't notice,” said Bobbie. “The aged are
often weak in the eyes.”

There was no sign of weakness, however, in the eyes, or in any other
part of the old gentleman, as he stepped from the train and looked up
and down the platform.

The three children, now that it came to the point, suddenly felt that
rush of deep shyness which makes your ears red and hot, your hands warm
and wet, and the tip of your nose pink and shiny.

“Oh,” said Phyllis, “my heart's thumping like a steam-engine--right
under my sash, too.”

“Nonsense,” said Peter, “people's hearts aren't under their sashes.”

“I don't care--mine is,” said Phyllis.

“If you're going to talk like a poetry-book,” said Peter, “my heart's in
my mouth.”

“My heart's in my boots--if you come to that,” said Roberta; “but do
come on--he'll think we're idiots.”

“He won't be far wrong,” said Peter, gloomily. And they went forward to
meet the old gentleman.

“Hullo,” he said, shaking hands with them all in turn. “This is a very
great pleasure.”

“It WAS good of you to get out,” Bobbie said, perspiring and polite.

He took her arm and drew her into the waiting room where she and the
others had played the advertisement game the day they found the Russian.
Phyllis and Peter followed. “Well?” said the old gentleman, giving
Bobbie's arm a kind little shake before he let it go. “Well? What is
it?”

“Oh, please!” said Bobbie.

“Yes?” said the old gentleman.

“What I mean to say--” said Bobbie.

“Well?” said the old gentleman.

“It's all very nice and kind,” said she.

“But?” he said.

“I wish I might say something,” she said.

“Say it,” said he.

“Well, then,” said Bobbie--and out came the story of the Russian who
had written the beautiful book about poor people, and had been sent to
prison and to Siberia for just that.

“And what we want more than anything in the world is to find his wife
and children for him,” said Bobbie, “but we don't know how. But you must
be most horribly clever, or you wouldn't be a Direction of the Railway.
And if YOU knew how--and would? We'd rather have that than anything else
in the world. We'd go without the watches, even, if you could sell them
and find his wife with the money.”

And the others said so, too, though not with so much enthusiasm.

“Hum,” said the old gentleman, pulling down the white waistcoat that
had the big gilt buttons on it, “what did you say the name
was--Fryingpansky?”

“No, no,” said Bobbie earnestly. “I'll write it down for you. It doesn't
really look at all like that except when you say it. Have you a bit of
pencil and the back of an envelope?” she asked.

The old gentleman got out a gold pencil-case and a beautiful,
sweet-smelling, green Russian leather note-book and opened it at a new
page.

“Here,” he said, “write here.”

She wrote down “Szezcpansky,” and said:--

“That's how you write it. You CALL it Shepansky.”

The old gentleman took out a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles and fitted
them on his nose. When he had read the name, he looked quite different.

“THAT man? Bless my soul!” he said. “Why, I've read his book! It's
translated into every European language. A fine book--a noble book. And
so your mother took him in--like the good Samaritan. Well, well. I'll
tell you what, youngsters--your mother must be a very good woman.”

“Of course she is,” said Phyllis, in astonishment.

“And you're a very good man,” said Bobbie, very shy, but firmly resolved
to be polite.

“You flatter me,” said the old gentleman, taking off his hat with a
flourish. “And now am I to tell you what I think of you?”

“Oh, please don't,” said Bobbie, hastily.

“Why?” asked the old gentleman.

“I don't exactly know,” said Bobbie. “Only--if it's horrid, I don't want
you to; and if it's nice, I'd rather you didn't.”

The old gentleman laughed.

“Well, then,” he said, “I'll only just say that I'm very glad you came
to me about this--very glad, indeed. And I shouldn't be surprised if I
found out something very soon. I know a great many Russians in London,
and every Russian knows HIS name. Now tell me all about yourselves.”

He turned to the others, but there was only one other, and that was
Peter. Phyllis had disappeared.

“Tell me all about yourself,” said the old gentleman again. And, quite
naturally, Peter was stricken dumb.

“All right, we'll have an examination,” said the old gentleman; “you two
sit on the table, and I'll sit on the bench and ask questions.”

He did, and out came their names and ages--their Father's name and
business--how long they had lived at Three Chimneys and a great deal
more.

The questions were beginning to turn on a herring and a half for three
halfpence, and a pound of lead and a pound of feathers, when the door of
the waiting room was kicked open by a boot; as the boot entered everyone
could see that its lace was coming undone--and in came Phyllis, very
slowly and carefully.

In one hand she carried a large tin can, and in the other a thick slice
of bread and butter.

“Afternoon tea,” she announced proudly, and held the can and the bread
and butter out to the old gentleman, who took them and said:--

“Bless my soul!”

“Yes,” said Phyllis.

“It's very thoughtful of you,” said the old gentleman, “very.”

“But you might have got a cup,” said Bobbie, “and a plate.”

“Perks always drinks out of the can,” said Phyllis, flushing red. “I
think it was very nice of him to give it me at all--let alone cups and
plates,” she added.

“So do I,” said the old gentleman, and he drank some of the tea and
tasted the bread and butter.

And then it was time for the next train, and he got into it with many
good-byes and kind last words.

“Well,” said Peter, when they were left on the platform, and the
tail-lights of the train disappeared round the corner, “it's my belief
that we've lighted a candle to-day--like Latimer, you know, when he was
being burned--and there'll be fireworks for our Russian before long.”

And so there were.

It wasn't ten days after the interview in the waiting room that the
three children were sitting on the top of the biggest rock in the field
below their house watching the 5.15 steam away from the station along
the bottom of the valley. They saw, too, the few people who had got out
at the station straggling up the road towards the village--and they saw
one person leave the road and open the gate that led across the fields
to Three Chimneys and to nowhere else.

“Who on earth!” said Peter, scrambling down.

“Let's go and see,” said Phyllis.

So they did. And when they got near enough to see who the person was,
they saw it was their old gentleman himself, his brass buttons winking
in the afternoon sunshine, and his white waistcoat looking whiter than
ever against the green of the field.

“Hullo!” shouted the children, waving their hands.

“Hullo!” shouted the old gentleman, waving his hat.

Then the three started to run--and when they got to him they hardly had
breath left to say:--

“How do you do?”

“Good news,” said he. “I've found your Russian friend's wife and
child--and I couldn't resist the temptation of giving myself the
pleasure of telling him.”

But as he looked at Bobbie's face he felt that he COULD resist that
temptation.

“Here,” he said to her, “you run on and tell him. The other two will
show me the way.”

Bobbie ran. But when she had breathlessly panted out the news to the
Russian and Mother sitting in the quiet garden--when Mother's face had
lighted up so beautifully, and she had said half a dozen quick French
words to the Exile--Bobbie wished that she had NOT carried the news. For
the Russian sprang up with a cry that made Bobbie's heart leap and then
tremble--a cry of love and longing such as she had never heard. Then he
took Mother's hand and kissed it gently and reverently--and then he sank
down in his chair and covered his face with his hands and sobbed. Bobbie
crept away. She did not want to see the others just then.

But she was as gay as anybody when the endless French talking was over,
when Peter had torn down to the village for buns and cakes, and the
girls had got tea ready and taken it out into the garden.

The old gentleman was most merry and delightful. He seemed to be able
to talk in French and English almost at the same moment, and Mother did
nearly as well. It was a delightful time. Mother seemed as if she could
not make enough fuss about the old gentleman, and she said yes at once
when he asked if he might present some “goodies” to his little friends.

The word was new to the children--but they guessed that it meant sweets,
for the three large pink and green boxes, tied with green ribbon, which
he took out of his bag, held unheard-of layers of beautiful chocolates.

The Russian's few belongings were packed, and they all saw him off at
the station.

Then Mother turned to the old gentleman and said:--

“I don't know how to thank you for EVERYTHING. It has been a real
pleasure to me to see you. But we live very quietly. I am so sorry that
I can't ask you to come and see us again.”

The children thought this very hard. When they HAD made a friend--and
such a friend--they would dearly have liked him to come and see them
again.

What the old gentleman thought they couldn't tell. He only said:--

“I consider myself very fortunate, Madam, to have been received once at
your house.”

“Ah,” said Mother, “I know I must seem surly and ungrateful--but--”

“You could never seem anything but a most charming and gracious lady,”
 said the old gentleman, with another of his bows.

And as they turned to go up the hill, Bobbie saw her Mother's face.

“How tired you look, Mammy,” she said; “lean on me.”

“It's my place to give Mother my arm,” said Peter. “I'm the head man of
the family when Father's away.”

Mother took an arm of each.

“How awfully nice,” said Phyllis, skipping joyfully, “to think of the
dear Russian embracing his long-lost wife. The baby must have grown a
lot since he saw it.”

“Yes,” said Mother.

“I wonder whether Father will think I'VE grown,” Phyllis went on,
skipping still more gaily. “I have grown already, haven't I, Mother?”

“Yes,” said Mother, “oh, yes,” and Bobbie and Peter felt her hands
tighten on their arms.

“Poor old Mammy, you ARE tired,” said Peter.

Bobbie said, “Come on, Phil; I'll race you to the gate.”

And she started the race, though she hated doing it. YOU know why Bobbie
did that. Mother only thought that Bobbie was tired of walking slowly.
Even Mothers, who love you better than anyone else ever will, don't
always understand.



Chapter VIII. The amateur firemen.


“That's a likely little brooch you've got on, Miss,” said Perks the
Porter; “I don't know as ever I see a thing more like a buttercup
without it WAS a buttercup.”

“Yes,” said Bobbie, glad and flushed by this approval. “I always thought
it was more like a buttercup almost than even a real one--and I NEVER
thought it would come to be mine, my very own--and then Mother gave it
to me for my birthday.”

“Oh, have you had a birthday?” said Perks; and he seemed quite
surprised, as though a birthday were a thing only granted to a favoured
few.

“Yes,” said Bobbie; “when's your birthday, Mr. Perks?” The children were
taking tea with Mr. Perks in the Porters' room among the lamps and
the railway almanacs. They had brought their own cups and some jam
turnovers. Mr. Perks made tea in a beer can, as usual, and everyone felt
very happy and confidential.

“My birthday?” said Perks, tipping some more dark brown tea out of the
can into Peter's cup. “I give up keeping of my birthday afore you was
born.”

“But you must have been born SOMETIME, you know,” said Phyllis,
thoughtfully, “even if it was twenty years ago--or thirty or sixty or
seventy.”

“Not so long as that, Missie,” Perks grinned as he answered. “If you
really want to know, it was thirty-two years ago, come the fifteenth of
this month.”

“Then why don't you keep it?” asked Phyllis.

“I've got something else to keep besides birthdays,” said Perks,
briefly.

“Oh! What?” asked Phyllis, eagerly. “Not secrets?”

“No,” said Perks, “the kids and the Missus.”

It was this talk that set the children thinking, and, presently,
talking. Perks was, on the whole, the dearest friend they had made. Not
so grand as the Station Master, but more approachable--less powerful
than the old gentleman, but more confidential.

“It seems horrid that nobody keeps his birthday,” said Bobbie. “Couldn't
WE do something?”

“Let's go up to the Canal bridge and talk it over,” said Peter. “I got a
new gut line from the postman this morning. He gave it me for a bunch of
roses that I gave him for his sweetheart. She's ill.”

“Then I do think you might have given her the roses for nothing,” said
Bobbie, indignantly.

“Nyang, nyang!” said Peter, disagreeably, and put his hands in his
pockets.

“He did, of course,” said Phyllis, in haste; “directly we heard she was
ill we got the roses ready and waited by the gate. It was when you were
making the brekker-toast. And when he'd said 'Thank you' for the roses
so many times--much more than he need have--he pulled out the line and
gave it to Peter. It wasn't exchange. It was the grateful heart.”

“Oh, I BEG your pardon, Peter,” said Bobbie, “I AM so sorry.”

“Don't mention it,” said Peter, grandly, “I knew you would be.”

So then they all went up to the Canal bridge. The idea was to fish from
the bridge, but the line was not quite long enough.

“Never mind,” said Bobbie. “Let's just stay here and look at things.
Everything's so beautiful.”

It was. The sun was setting in red splendour over the grey and purple
hills, and the canal lay smooth and shiny in the shadow--no ripple broke
its surface. It was like a grey satin ribbon between the dusky green
silk of the meadows that were on each side of its banks.

“It's all right,” said Peter, “but somehow I can always see how pretty
things are much better when I've something to do. Let's get down on to
the towpath and fish from there.”

Phyllis and Bobbie remembered how the boys on the canal-boats had thrown
coal at them, and they said so.

“Oh, nonsense,” said Peter. “There aren't any boys here now. If there
were, I'd fight them.”

Peter's sisters were kind enough not to remind him how he had NOT fought
the boys when coal had last been thrown. Instead they said, “All right,
then,” and cautiously climbed down the steep bank to the towing-path.
The line was carefully baited, and for half an hour they fished
patiently and in vain. Not a single nibble came to nourish hope in their
hearts.

All eyes were intent on the sluggish waters that earnestly pretended
they had never harboured a single minnow when a loud rough shout made
them start.

“Hi!” said the shout, in most disagreeable tones, “get out of that,
can't you?”

An old white horse coming along the towing-path was within half a dozen
yards of them. They sprang to their feet and hastily climbed up the
bank.

“We'll slip down again when they've gone by,” said Bobbie.

But, alas, the barge, after the manner of barges, stopped under the
bridge.

“She's going to anchor,” said Peter; “just our luck!”

The barge did not anchor, because an anchor is not part of a
canal-boat's furniture, but she was moored with ropes fore and aft--and
the ropes were made fast to the palings and to crowbars driven into the
ground.

“What you staring at?” growled the Bargee, crossly.

“We weren't staring,” said Bobbie; “we wouldn't be so rude.”

“Rude be blessed,” said the man; “get along with you!”

“Get along yourself,” said Peter. He remembered what he had said about
fighting boys, and, besides, he felt safe halfway up the bank. “We've as
much right here as anyone else.”

“Oh, 'AVE you, indeed!” said the man. “We'll soon see about that.” And
he came across his deck and began to climb down the side of his barge.

“Oh, come away, Peter, come away!” said Bobbie and Phyllis, in agonised
unison.

“Not me,” said Peter, “but YOU'D better.”

The girls climbed to the top of the bank and stood ready to bolt for
home as soon as they saw their brother out of danger. The way home lay
all down hill. They knew that they all ran well. The Bargee did not look
as if HE did. He was red-faced, heavy, and beefy.

But as soon as his foot was on the towing-path the children saw that
they had misjudged him.

He made one spring up the bank and caught Peter by the leg, dragged him
down--set him on his feet with a shake--took him by the ear--and said
sternly:--

“Now, then, what do you mean by it? Don't you know these 'ere waters is
preserved? You ain't no right catching fish 'ere--not to say nothing of
your precious cheek.”

Peter was always proud afterwards when he remembered that, with the
Bargee's furious fingers tightening on his ear, the Bargee's crimson
countenance close to his own, the Bargee's hot breath on his neck, he
had the courage to speak the truth.

“I WASN'T catching fish,” said Peter.

“That's not YOUR fault, I'll be bound,” said the man, giving Peter's ear
a twist--not a hard one--but still a twist.

Peter could not say that it was. Bobbie and Phyllis had been holding
on to the railings above and skipping with anxiety. Now suddenly Bobbie
slipped through the railings and rushed down the bank towards Peter, so
impetuously that Phyllis, following more temperately, felt certain that
her sister's descent would end in the waters of the canal. And so it
would have done if the Bargee hadn't let go of Peter's ear--and caught
her in his jerseyed arm.

“Who are you a-shoving of?” he said, setting her on her feet.

“Oh,” said Bobbie, breathless, “I'm not shoving anybody. At least, not
on purpose. Please don't be cross with Peter. Of course, if it's your
canal, we're sorry and we won't any more. But we didn't know it was
yours.”

“Go along with you,” said the Bargee.

“Yes, we will; indeed we will,” said Bobbie, earnestly; “but we do beg
your pardon--and really we haven't caught a single fish. I'd tell you
directly if we had, honour bright I would.”

She held out her hands and Phyllis turned out her little empty pocket to
show that really they hadn't any fish concealed about them.

“Well,” said the Bargee, more gently, “cut along, then, and don't you do
it again, that's all.”

The children hurried up the bank.

“Chuck us a coat, M'ria,” shouted the man. And a red-haired woman in a
green plaid shawl came out from the cabin door with a baby in her arms
and threw a coat to him. He put it on, climbed the bank, and slouched
along across the bridge towards the village.

“You'll find me up at the 'Rose and Crown' when you've got the kid to
sleep,” he called to her from the bridge.

When he was out of sight the children slowly returned. Peter insisted on
this.

“The canal may belong to him,” he said, “though I don't believe it
does. But the bridge is everybody's. Doctor Forrest told me it's public
property. I'm not going to be bounced off the bridge by him or anyone
else, so I tell you.”

Peter's ear was still sore and so were his feelings.

The girls followed him as gallant soldiers might follow the leader of a
forlorn hope.

“I do wish you wouldn't,” was all they said.

“Go home if you're afraid,” said Peter; “leave me alone. I'M not
afraid.”

The sound of the man's footsteps died away along the quiet road. The
peace of the evening was not broken by the notes of the sedge-warblers
or by the voice of the woman in the barge, singing her baby to sleep. It
was a sad song she sang. Something about Bill Bailey and how she wanted
him to come home.

The children stood leaning their arms on the parapet of the bridge; they
were glad to be quiet for a few minutes because all three hearts were
beating much more quickly.

“I'm not going to be driven away by any old bargeman, I'm not,” said
Peter, thickly.

“Of course not,” Phyllis said soothingly; “you didn't give in to him! So
now we might go home, don't you think?”

“NO,” said Peter.

Nothing more was said till the woman got off the barge, climbed the
bank, and came across the bridge.

She hesitated, looking at the three backs of the children, then she
said, “Ahem.”

Peter stayed as he was, but the girls looked round.

“You mustn't take no notice of my Bill,” said the woman; “'is bark's
worse'n 'is bite. Some of the kids down Farley way is fair terrors. It
was them put 'is back up calling out about who ate the puppy-pie under
Marlow bridge.”

“Who DID?” asked Phyllis.

“_I_ dunno,” said the woman. “Nobody don't know! But somehow, and I
don't know the why nor the wherefore of it, them words is p'ison to a
barge-master. Don't you take no notice. 'E won't be back for two hours
good. You might catch a power o' fish afore that. The light's good an'
all,” she added.

“Thank you,” said Bobbie. “You're very kind. Where's your baby?”

“Asleep in the cabin,” said the woman. “'E's all right. Never wakes
afore twelve. Reg'lar as a church clock, 'e is.”

“I'm sorry,” said Bobbie; “I would have liked to see him, close to.”

“And a finer you never did see, Miss, though I says it.” The woman's
face brightened as she spoke.

“Aren't you afraid to leave it?” said Peter.

“Lor' love you, no,” said the woman; “who'd hurt a little thing like
'im? Besides, Spot's there. So long!”

The woman went away.

“Shall we go home?” said Phyllis.

“You can. I'm going to fish,” said Peter briefly.

“I thought we came up here to talk about Perks's birthday,” said
Phyllis.

“Perks's birthday'll keep.”

So they got down on the towing-path again and Peter fished. He did not
catch anything.

It was almost quite dark, the girls were getting tired, and as Bobbie
said, it was past bedtime, when suddenly Phyllis cried, “What's that?”

And she pointed to the canal boat. Smoke was coming from the chimney of
the cabin, had indeed been curling softly into the soft evening air all
the time--but now other wreaths of smoke were rising, and these were
from the cabin door.

“It's on fire--that's all,” said Peter, calmly. “Serve him right.”

“Oh--how CAN you?” cried Phyllis. “Think of the poor dear dog.”

“The BABY!” screamed Bobbie.

In an instant all three made for the barge.

Her mooring ropes were slack, and the little breeze, hardly strong
enough to be felt, had yet been strong enough to drift her stern against
the bank. Bobbie was first--then came Peter, and it was Peter who
slipped and fell. He went into the canal up to his neck, and his feet
could not feel the bottom, but his arm was on the edge of the barge.
Phyllis caught at his hair. It hurt, but it helped him to get out. Next
minute he had leaped on to the barge, Phyllis following.

“Not you!” he shouted to Bobbie; “ME, because I'm wet.”

He caught up with Bobbie at the cabin door, and flung her aside very
roughly indeed; if they had been playing, such roughness would have made
Bobbie weep with tears of rage and pain. Now, though he flung her on
to the edge of the hold, so that her knee and her elbow were grazed and
bruised, she only cried:--

“No--not you--ME,” and struggled up again. But not quickly enough.

Peter had already gone down two of the cabin steps into the cloud of
thick smoke. He stopped, remembered all he had ever heard of fires,
pulled his soaked handkerchief out of his breast pocket and tied it over
his mouth. As he pulled it out he said:--

“It's all right, hardly any fire at all.”

And this, though he thought it was a lie, was rather good of Peter. It
was meant to keep Bobbie from rushing after him into danger. Of course
it didn't.

The cabin glowed red. A paraffin lamp was burning calmly in an orange
mist.

“Hi,” said Peter, lifting the handkerchief from his mouth for a moment.
“Hi, Baby--where are you?” He choked.

“Oh, let ME go,” cried Bobbie, close behind him. Peter pushed her back
more roughly than before, and went on.

Now what would have happened if the baby hadn't cried I don't know--but
just at that moment it DID cry. Peter felt his way through the dark
smoke, found something small and soft and warm and alive, picked it up
and backed out, nearly tumbling over Bobbie who was close behind. A dog
snapped at his leg--tried to bark, choked.

“I've got the kid,” said Peter, tearing off the handkerchief and
staggering on to the deck.

Bobbie caught at the place where the bark came from, and her hands met
on the fat back of a smooth-haired dog. It turned and fastened its teeth
on her hand, but very gently, as much as to say:--

“I'm bound to bark and bite if strangers come into my master's cabin,
but I know you mean well, so I won't REALLY bite.”

Bobbie dropped the dog.

“All right, old man. Good dog,” said she. “Here--give me the baby,
Peter; you're so wet you'll give it cold.”

Peter was only too glad to hand over the strange little bundle that
squirmed and whimpered in his arms.

“Now,” said Bobbie, quickly, “you run straight to the 'Rose and Crown'
and tell them. Phil and I will stay here with the precious. Hush, then,
a dear, a duck, a darling! Go NOW, Peter! Run!”

“I can't run in these things,” said Peter, firmly; “they're as heavy as
lead. I'll walk.”

“Then I'LL run,” said Bobbie. “Get on the bank, Phil, and I'll hand you
the dear.”

The baby was carefully handed. Phyllis sat down on the bank and tried to
hush the baby. Peter wrung the water from his sleeves and knickerbocker
legs as well as he could, and it was Bobbie who ran like the wind across
the bridge and up the long white quiet twilight road towards the 'Rose
and Crown.'

There is a nice old-fashioned room at the 'Rose and Crown; where Bargees
and their wives sit of an evening drinking their supper beer, and
toasting their supper cheese at a glowing basketful of coals that
sticks out into the room under a great hooded chimney and is warmer and
prettier and more comforting than any other fireplace _I_ ever saw.

There was a pleasant party of barge people round the fire. You might
not have thought it pleasant, but they did; for they were all friends
or acquaintances, and they liked the same sort of things, and talked
the same sort of talk. This is the real secret of pleasant society. The
Bargee Bill, whom the children had found so disagreeable, was considered
excellent company by his mates. He was telling a tale of his own
wrongs--always a thrilling subject. It was his barge he was speaking
about.

“And 'e sent down word 'paint her inside hout,' not namin' no colour,
d'ye see? So I gets a lotter green paint and I paints her stem to stern,
and I tell yer she looked A1. Then 'E comes along and 'e says, 'Wot yer
paint 'er all one colour for?' 'e says. And I says, says I, 'Cause I
thought she'd look fust-rate,' says I, 'and I think so still.' An' he
says, 'DEW yer? Then ye can just pay for the bloomin' paint yerself,'
says he. An' I 'ad to, too.” A murmur of sympathy ran round the
room. Breaking noisily in on it came Bobbie. She burst open the swing
door--crying breathlessly:--

“Bill! I want Bill the Bargeman.”

There was a stupefied silence. Pots of beer were held in mid-air,
paralysed on their way to thirsty mouths.

“Oh,” said Bobbie, seeing the bargewoman and making for her. “Your barge
cabin's on fire. Go quickly.”

The woman started to her feet, and put a big red hand to her waist, on
the left side, where your heart seems to be when you are frightened or
miserable.

“Reginald Horace!” she cried in a terrible voice; “my Reginald Horace!”

“All right,” said Bobbie, “if you mean the baby; got him out safe. Dog,
too.” She had no breath for more, except, “Go on--it's all alight.”

Then she sank on the ale-house bench and tried to get that breath of
relief after running which people call the 'second wind.' But she felt
as though she would never breathe again.

Bill the Bargee rose slowly and heavily. But his wife was a hundred
yards up the road before he had quite understood what was the matter.

Phyllis, shivering by the canal side, had hardly heard the quick
approaching feet before the woman had flung herself on the railing,
rolled down the bank, and snatched the baby from her.

“Don't,” said Phyllis, reproachfully; “I'd just got him to sleep.”

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Bill came up later talking in a language with which the children were
wholly unfamiliar. He leaped on to the barge and dipped up pails
of water. Peter helped him and they put out the fire. Phyllis, the
bargewoman, and the baby--and presently Bobbie, too--cuddled together in
a heap on the bank.

“Lord help me, if it was me left anything as could catch alight,” said
the woman again and again.

But it wasn't she. It was Bill the Bargeman, who had knocked his pipe
out and the red ash had fallen on the hearth-rug and smouldered there
and at last broken into flame. Though a stern man he was just. He did
not blame his wife for what was his own fault, as many bargemen, and
other men, too, would have done.

         *          *          *          *          *          *

Mother was half wild with anxiety when at last the three children turned
up at Three Chimneys, all very wet by now, for Peter seemed to have come
off on the others. But when she had disentangled the truth of what had
happened from their mixed and incoherent narrative, she owned that they
had done quite right, and could not possibly have done otherwise. Nor
did she put any obstacles in the way of their accepting the cordial
invitation with which the bargeman had parted from them.

“Ye be here at seven to-morrow,” he had said, “and I'll take you the
entire trip to Farley and back, so I will, and not a penny to pay.
Nineteen locks!”

They did not know what locks were; but they were at the bridge at seven,
with bread and cheese and half a soda cake, and quite a quarter of a leg
of mutton in a basket.

It was a glorious day. The old white horse strained at the ropes, the
barge glided smoothly and steadily through the still water. The sky was
blue overhead. Mr. Bill was as nice as anyone could possibly be. No one
would have thought that he could be the same man who had held Peter by
the ear. As for Mrs. Bill, she had always been nice, as Bobbie said, and
so had the baby, and even Spot, who might have bitten them quite badly
if he had liked.

“It was simply ripping, Mother,” said Peter, when they reached home very
happy, very tired, and very dirty, “right over that glorious aqueduct.
And locks--you don't know what they're like. You sink into the ground
and then, when you feel you're never going to stop going down, two great
black gates open slowly, slowly--you go out, and there you are on the
canal just like you were before.”

“I know,” said Mother, “there are locks on the Thames. Father and I used
to go on the river at Marlow before we were married.”

“And the dear, darling, ducky baby,” said Bobbie; “it let me nurse it
for ages and ages--and it WAS so good. Mother, I wish we had a baby to
play with.”

“And everybody was so nice to us,” said Phyllis, “everybody we met. And
they say we may fish whenever we like. And Bill is going to show us the
way next time he's in these parts. He says we don't know really.”

“He said YOU didn't know,” said Peter; “but, Mother, he said he'd tell
all the bargees up and down the canal that we were the real, right sort,
and they were to treat us like good pals, as we were.”

“So then I said,” Phyllis interrupted, “we'd always each wear a red
ribbon when we went fishing by the canal, so they'd know it was US, and
we were the real, right sort, and be nice to us!”

“So you've made another lot of friends,” said Mother; “first the railway
and then the canal!”

“Oh, yes,” said Bobbie; “I think everyone in the world is friends if you
can only get them to see you don't want to be UN-friends.”

“Perhaps you're right,” said Mother; and she sighed. “Come, Chicks. It's
bedtime.”

“Yes,” said Phyllis. “Oh dear--and we went up there to talk about what
we'd do for Perks's birthday. And we haven't talked a single thing about
it!”

“No more we have,” said Bobbie; “but Peter's saved Reginald Horace's
life. I think that's about good enough for one evening.”

“Bobbie would have saved him if I hadn't knocked her down; twice I did,”
 said Peter, loyally.

“So would I,” said Phyllis, “if I'd known what to do.”

“Yes,” said Mother, “you've saved a little child's life. I do think
that's enough for one evening. Oh, my darlings, thank God YOU'RE all
safe!”



Chapter IX. The pride of Perks.


It was breakfast-time. Mother's face was very bright as she poured the
milk and ladled out the porridge.

“I've sold another story, Chickies,” she said; “the one about the King
of the Mussels, so there'll be buns for tea. You can go and get them as
soon as they're baked. About eleven, isn't it?”

Peter, Phyllis, and Bobbie exchanged glances with each other, six
glances in all. Then Bobbie said:--

“Mother, would you mind if we didn't have the buns for tea to-night, but
on the fifteenth? That's next Thursday.”

“_I_ don't mind when you have them, dear,” said Mother, “but why?”

“Because it's Perks's birthday,” said Bobbie; “he's thirty-two, and
he says he doesn't keep his birthday any more, because he's got other
things to keep--not rabbits or secrets--but the kids and the missus.”

“You mean his wife and children,” said Mother.

“Yes,” said Phyllis; “it's the same thing, isn't it?”

“And we thought we'd make a nice birthday for him. He's been so awfully
jolly decent to us, you know, Mother,” said Peter, “and we agreed that
next bun-day we'd ask you if we could.”

“But suppose there hadn't been a bun-day before the fifteenth?” said
Mother.

“Oh, then, we meant to ask you to let us anti--antipate it, and go
without when the bun-day came.”

“Anticipate,” said Mother. “I see. Certainly. It would be nice to put
his name on the buns with pink sugar, wouldn't it?”

“Perks,” said Peter, “it's not a pretty name.”

“His other name's Albert,” said Phyllis; “I asked him once.”

“We might put A. P.,” said Mother; “I'll show you how when the day
comes.”

This was all very well as far as it went. But even fourteen halfpenny
buns with A. P. on them in pink sugar do not of themselves make a very
grand celebration.

“There are always flowers, of course,” said Bobbie, later, when a really
earnest council was being held on the subject in the hay-loft where
the broken chaff-cutting machine was, and the row of holes to drop hay
through into the hay-racks over the mangers of the stables below.

“He's got lots of flowers of his own,” said Peter.

“But it's always nice to have them given you,” said Bobbie, “however
many you've got of your own. We can use flowers for trimmings to the
birthday. But there must be something to trim besides buns.”

“Let's all be quiet and think,” said Phyllis; “no one's to speak until
it's thought of something.”

So they were all quiet and so very still that a brown rat thought that
there was no one in the loft and came out very boldly. When Bobbie
sneezed, the rat was quite shocked and hurried away, for he saw that a
hay-loft where such things could happen was no place for a respectable
middle-aged rat that liked a quiet life.

“Hooray!” cried Peter, suddenly, “I've got it.” He jumped up and kicked
at the loose hay.

“What?” said the others, eagerly.

“Why, Perks is so nice to everybody. There must be lots of people in the
village who'd like to help to make him a birthday. Let's go round and
ask everybody.”

“Mother said we weren't to ask people for things,” said Bobbie,
doubtfully.

“For ourselves, she meant, silly, not for other people. I'll ask the old
gentleman too. You see if I don't,” said Peter.

“Let's ask Mother first,” said Bobbie.

“Oh, what's the use of bothering Mother about every little thing?”
 said Peter, “especially when she's busy. Come on. Let's go down to the
village now and begin.”

So they went. The old lady at the Post-office said she didn't see why
Perks should have a birthday any more than anyone else.

“No,” said Bobbie, “I should like everyone to have one. Only we know
when his is.”

“Mine's to-morrow,” said the old lady, “and much notice anyone will take
of it. Go along with you.”

So they went.

And some people were kind, and some were crusty. And some would give and
some would not. It is rather difficult work asking for things, even for
other people, as you have no doubt found if you have ever tried it.

When the children got home and counted up what had been given and what
had been promised, they felt that for the first day it was not so bad.
Peter wrote down the lists of the things in the little pocket-book where
he kept the numbers of his engines. These were the lists:--

     GIVEN.
     A tobacco pipe from the sweet shop.
     Half a pound of tea from the grocer's.
     A woollen scarf slightly faded from the draper's, which was the
         other side of the grocer's.
     A stuffed squirrel from the Doctor.

     PROMISED.
     A piece of meat from the butcher.
     Six fresh eggs from the woman who lived in the old turnpike cottage.
     A piece of honeycomb and six bootlaces from the cobbler, and an
         iron shovel from the blacksmith's.

Very early next morning Bobbie got up and woke Phyllis. This had been
agreed on between them. They had not told Peter because they thought he
would think it silly. But they told him afterwards, when it had turned
out all right.

They cut a big bunch of roses, and put it in a basket with the
needle-book that Phyllis had made for Bobbie on her birthday, and a very
pretty blue necktie of Phyllis's. Then they wrote on a paper: 'For Mrs.
Ransome, with our best love, because it is her birthday,' and they put
the paper in the basket, and they took it to the Post-office, and went
in and put it on the counter and ran away before the old woman at the
Post-office had time to get into her shop.

When they got home Peter had grown confidential over helping Mother to
get the breakfast and had told her their plans.

“There's no harm in it,” said Mother, “but it depends HOW you do it. I
only hope he won't be offended and think it's CHARITY. Poor people are
very proud, you know.”

“It isn't because he's poor,” said Phyllis; “it's because we're fond of
him.”

“I'll find some things that Phyllis has outgrown,” said Mother, “if
you're quite sure you can give them to him without his being offended. I
should like to do some little thing for him because he's been so kind to
you. I can't do much because we're poor ourselves. What are you writing,
Bobbie?”

“Nothing particular,” said Bobbie, who had suddenly begun to scribble.
“I'm sure he'd like the things, Mother.”

The morning of the fifteenth was spent very happily in getting the buns
and watching Mother make A. P. on them with pink sugar. You know how
it's done, of course? You beat up whites of eggs and mix powdered sugar
with them, and put in a few drops of cochineal. And then you make a cone
of clean, white paper with a little hole at the pointed end, and put the
pink egg-sugar in at the big end. It runs slowly out at the pointed end,
and you write the letters with it just as though it were a great fat pen
full of pink sugar-ink.

The buns looked beautiful with A. P. on every one, and, when they were
put in a cool oven to set the sugar, the children went up to the village
to collect the honey and the shovel and the other promised things.

The old lady at the Post-office was standing on her doorstep. The
children said “Good morning,” politely, as they passed.

“Here, stop a bit,” she said.

So they stopped.

“Those roses,” said she.

“Did you like them?” said Phyllis; “they were as fresh as fresh. _I_
made the needle-book, but it was Bobbie's present.” She skipped joyously
as she spoke.

“Here's your basket,” said the Post-office woman. She went in and
brought out the basket. It was full of fat, red gooseberries.

“I dare say Perks's children would like them,” said she.

“You ARE an old dear,” said Phyllis, throwing her arms around the old
lady's fat waist. “Perks WILL be pleased.”

“He won't be half so pleased as I was with your needle-book and the tie
and the pretty flowers and all,” said the old lady, patting Phyllis's
shoulder. “You're good little souls, that you are. Look here. I've got a
pram round the back in the wood-lodge. It was got for my Emmie's first,
that didn't live but six months, and she never had but that one. I'd
like Mrs. Perks to have it. It 'ud be a help to her with that great boy
of hers. Will you take it along?”

“OH!” said all the children together.

When Mrs. Ransome had got out the perambulator and taken off the careful
papers that covered it, and dusted it all over, she said:--

“Well, there it is. I don't know but what I'd have given it to her
before if I'd thought of it. Only I didn't quite know if she'd accept of
it from me. You tell her it was my Emmie's little one's pram--”

“Oh, ISN'T it nice to think there is going to be a real live baby in it
again!”

“Yes,” said Mrs. Ransome, sighing, and then laughing; “here, I'll give
you some peppermint cushions for the little ones, and then you run along
before I give you the roof off my head and the clothes off my back.”

All the things that had been collected for Perks were packed into
the perambulator, and at half-past three Peter and Bobbie and Phyllis
wheeled it down to the little yellow house where Perks lived.

The house was very tidy. On the window ledge was a jug of wild-flowers,
big daisies, and red sorrel, and feathery, flowery grasses.

There was a sound of splashing from the wash-house, and a partly washed
boy put his head round the door.

“Mother's a-changing of herself,” he said.

“Down in a minute,” a voice sounded down the narrow, freshly scrubbed
stairs.

The children waited. Next moment the stairs creaked and Mrs. Perks came
down, buttoning her bodice. Her hair was brushed very smooth and tight,
and her face shone with soap and water.

“I'm a bit late changing, Miss,” she said to Bobbie, “owing to me having
had a extry clean-up to-day, along o' Perks happening to name its being
his birthday. I don't know what put it into his head to think of such
a thing. We keeps the children's birthdays, of course; but him and
me--we're too old for such like, as a general rule.”

“We knew it was his birthday,” said Peter, “and we've got some presents
for him outside in the perambulator.”

As the presents were being unpacked, Mrs. Perks gasped. When they
were all unpacked, she surprised and horrified the children by sitting
suddenly down on a wooden chair and bursting into tears.

“Oh, don't!” said everybody; “oh, please don't!” And Peter added,
perhaps a little impatiently: “What on earth is the matter? You don't
mean to say you don't like it?”

Mrs. Perks only sobbed. The Perks children, now as shiny-faced as anyone
could wish, stood at the wash-house door, and scowled at the intruders.
There was a silence, an awkward silence.

“DON'T you like it?” said Peter, again, while his sisters patted Mrs.
Perks on the back.

She stopped crying as suddenly as she had begun.

“There, there, don't you mind me. I'M all right!” she said. “Like it?
Why, it's a birthday such as Perks never 'ad, not even when 'e was a boy
and stayed with his uncle, who was a corn chandler in his own account.
He failed afterwards. Like it? Oh--” and then she went on and said all
sorts of things that I won't write down, because I am sure that Peter
and Bobbie and Phyllis would not like me to. Their ears got hotter and
hotter, and their faces redder and redder, at the kind things Mrs. Perks
said. They felt they had done nothing to deserve all this praise.

At last Peter said: “Look here, we're glad you're pleased. But if you go
on saying things like that, we must go home. And we did want to stay and
see if Mr. Perks is pleased, too. But we can't stand this.”

“I won't say another single word,” said Mrs. Perks, with a beaming face,
“but that needn't stop me thinking, need it? For if ever--”

“Can we have a plate for the buns?” Bobbie asked abruptly. And then Mrs.
Perks hastily laid the table for tea, and the buns and the honey and
the gooseberries were displayed on plates, and the roses were put in two
glass jam jars, and the tea-table looked, as Mrs. Perks said, “fit for a
Prince.”

“To think!” she said, “me getting the place tidy early, and the little
'uns getting the wild-flowers and all--when never did I think there'd be
anything more for him except the ounce of his pet particular that I
got o' Saturday and been saving up for 'im ever since. Bless us! 'e IS
early!”

Perks had indeed unlatched the latch of the little front gate.

“Oh,” whispered Bobbie, “let's hide in the back kitchen, and YOU tell
him about it. But give him the tobacco first, because you got it for
him. And when you've told him, we'll all come in and shout, 'Many happy
returns!'”

It was a very nice plan, but it did not quite come off. To begin with,
there was only just time for Peter and Bobbie and Phyllis to rush into
the wash-house, pushing the young and open-mouthed Perks children in
front of them. There was not time to shut the door, so that, without at
all meaning it, they had to listen to what went on in the kitchen. The
wash-house was a tight fit for the Perks children and the Three Chimneys
children, as well as all the wash-house's proper furniture, including
the mangle and the copper.

“Hullo, old woman!” they heard Mr. Perks's voice say; “here's a pretty
set-out!”

“It's your birthday tea, Bert,” said Mrs. Perks, “and here's a ounce of
your extry particular. I got it o' Saturday along o' your happening to
remember it was your birthday to-day.”

“Good old girl!” said Mr. Perks, and there was a sound of a kiss.

“But what's that pram doing here? And what's all these bundles? And
where did you get the sweetstuff, and--”

The children did not hear what Mrs. Perks replied, because just then
Bobbie gave a start, put her hand in her pocket, and all her body grew
stiff with horror.

“Oh!” she whispered to the others, “whatever shall we do? I forgot to
put the labels on any of the things! He won't know what's from who.
He'll think it's all US, and that we're trying to be grand or charitable
or something horrid.”

“Hush!” said Peter.

And then they heard the voice of Mr. Perks, loud and rather angry.

“I don't care,” he said; “I won't stand it, and so I tell you straight.”

“But,” said Mrs. Perks, “it's them children you make such a fuss
about--the children from the Three Chimneys.”

“I don't care,” said Perks, firmly, “not if it was a angel from Heaven.
We've got on all right all these years and no favours asked. I'm not
going to begin these sort of charity goings-on at my time of life, so
don't you think it, Nell.”

“Oh, hush!” said poor Mrs Perks; “Bert, shut your silly tongue, for
goodness' sake. The all three of 'ems in the wash-house a-listening to
every word you speaks.”

“Then I'll give them something to listen to,” said the angry Perks;
“I've spoke my mind to them afore now, and I'll do it again,” he added,
and he took two strides to the wash-house door, and flung it wide
open--as wide, that is, as it would go, with the tightly packed children
behind it.

“Come out,” said Perks, “come out and tell me what you mean by it. 'Ave
I ever complained to you of being short, as you comes this charity lay
over me?”

“OH!” said Phyllis, “I thought you'd be so pleased; I'll never try to be
kind to anyone else as long as I live. No, I won't, not never.”

She burst into tears.

“We didn't mean any harm,” said Peter.

“It ain't what you means so much as what you does,” said Perks.

“Oh, DON'T!” cried Bobbie, trying hard to be braver than Phyllis, and to
find more words than Peter had done for explaining in. “We thought you'd
love it. We always have things on our birthdays.”

“Oh, yes,” said Perks, “your own relations; that's different.”

“Oh, no,” Bobbie answered. “NOT our own relations. All the servants
always gave us things at home, and us to them when it was their
birthdays. And when it was mine, and Mother gave me the brooch like a
buttercup, Mrs. Viney gave me two lovely glass pots, and nobody thought
she was coming the charity lay over us.”

“If it had been glass pots here,” said Perks, “I wouldn't ha' said so
much. It's there being all this heaps and heaps of things I can't stand.
No--nor won't, neither.”

“But they're not all from us--” said Peter, “only we forgot to put the
labels on. They're from all sorts of people in the village.”

“Who put 'em up to it, I'd like to know?” asked Perks.

“Why, we did,” sniffed Phyllis.

Perks sat down heavily in the elbow-chair and looked at them with what
Bobbie afterwards described as withering glances of gloomy despair.

“So you've been round telling the neighbours we can't make both
ends meet? Well, now you've disgraced us as deep as you can in the
neighbourhood, you can just take the whole bag of tricks back w'ere it
come from. Very much obliged, I'm sure. I don't doubt but what you meant
it kind, but I'd rather not be acquainted with you any longer if it's
all the same to you.” He deliberately turned the chair round so that
his back was turned to the children. The legs of the chair grated on the
brick floor, and that was the only sound that broke the silence.

Then suddenly Bobbie spoke.

“Look here,” she said, “this is most awful.”

“That's what I says,” said Perks, not turning round.

“Look here,” said Bobbie, desperately, “we'll go if you like--and you
needn't be friends with us any more if you don't want, but--”

“WE shall always be friends with YOU, however nasty you are to us,”
 sniffed Phyllis, wildly.

“Be quiet,” said Peter, in a fierce aside.

“But before we go,” Bobbie went on desperately, “do let us show you the
labels we wrote to put on the things.”

“I don't want to see no labels,” said Perks, “except proper luggage ones
in my own walk of life. Do you think I've kept respectable and outer
debt on what I gets, and her having to take in washing, to be give away
for a laughing-stock to all the neighbours?”

“Laughing?” said Peter; “you don't know.”

“You're a very hasty gentleman,” whined Phyllis; “you know you were
wrong once before, about us not telling you the secret about the
Russian. Do let Bobbie tell you about the labels!”

“Well. Go ahead!” said Perks, grudgingly.

“Well, then,” said Bobbie, fumbling miserably, yet not without hope, in
her tightly stuffed pocket, “we wrote down all the things everybody said
when they gave us the things, with the people's names, because Mother
said we ought to be careful--because--but I wrote down what she
said--and you'll see.”

But Bobbie could not read the labels just at once. She had to swallow
once or twice before she could begin.

Mrs. Perks had been crying steadily ever since her husband had opened
the wash-house door. Now she caught her breath, choked, and said:--

“Don't you upset yourself, Missy. _I_ know you meant it kind if he
doesn't.”

“May I read the labels?” said Bobbie, crying on to the slips as she
tried to sort them. “Mother's first. It says:--

“'Little Clothes for Mrs. Perks's children.' Mother said, 'I'll find
some of Phyllis's things that she's grown out of if you're quite sure
Mr. Perks wouldn't be offended and think it's meant for charity. I'd
like to do some little thing for him, because he's so kind to you. I
can't do much because we're poor ourselves.'”

Bobbie paused.

“That's all right,” said Perks, “your Ma's a born lady. We'll keep the
little frocks, and what not, Nell.”

“Then there's the perambulator and the gooseberries, and the sweets,”
 said Bobbie, “they're from Mrs. Ransome. She said: 'I dare say Mr.
Perks's children would like the sweets. And the perambulator was got for
my Emmie's first--it didn't live but six months, and she's never had but
that one. I'd like Mrs. Perks to have it. It would be a help with her
fine boy. I'd have given it before if I'd been sure she'd accept of
it from me.' She told me to tell you,” Bobbie added, “that it was her
Emmie's little one's pram.”

“I can't send that pram back, Bert,” said Mrs Perks, firmly, “and I
won't. So don't you ask me--”

“I'm not a-asking anything,” said Perks, gruffly.

“Then the shovel,” said Bobbie. “Mr. James made it for you himself. And
he said--where is it? Oh, yes, here! He said, 'You tell Mr. Perks it's a
pleasure to make a little trifle for a man as is so much respected,' and
then he said he wished he could shoe your children and his own children,
like they do the horses, because, well, he knew what shoe leather was.”

“James is a good enough chap,” said Perks.

“Then the honey,” said Bobbie, in haste, “and the boot-laces. HE said
he respected a man that paid his way--and the butcher said the same. And
the old turnpike woman said many was the time you'd lent her a hand
with her garden when you were a lad--and things like that came home to
roost--I don't know what she meant. And everybody who gave anything said
they liked you, and it was a very good idea of ours; and nobody said
anything about charity or anything horrid like that. And the old
gentleman gave Peter a gold pound for you, and said you were a man who
knew your work. And I thought you'd LOVE to know how fond people are
of you, and I never was so unhappy in my life. Good-bye. I hope you'll
forgive us some day--”

She could say no more, and she turned to go.

“Stop,” said Perks, still with his back to them; “I take back every word
I've said contrary to what you'd wish. Nell, set on the kettle.”

“We'll take the things away if you're unhappy about them,” said Peter;
“but I think everybody'll be most awfully disappointed, as well as us.”

“I'm not unhappy about them,” said Perks; “I don't know,” he added,
suddenly wheeling the chair round and showing a very odd-looking
screwed-up face, “I don't know as ever I was better pleased. Not so much
with the presents--though they're an A1 collection--but the kind respect
of our neighbours. That's worth having, eh, Nell?”

“I think it's all worth having,” said Mrs. Perks, “and you've made a
most ridiculous fuss about nothing, Bert, if you ask me.”

“No, I ain't,” said Perks, firmly; “if a man didn't respect hisself, no
one wouldn't do it for him.”

“But everyone respects you,” said Bobbie; “they all said so.”

“I knew you'd like it when you really understood,” said Phyllis,
brightly.

“Humph! You'll stay to tea?” said Mr. Perks.

Later on Peter proposed Mr. Perks's health. And Mr. Perks proposed a
toast, also honoured in tea, and the toast was, “May the garland of
friendship be ever green,” which was much more poetical than anyone had
expected from him.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

“Jolly good little kids, those,” said Mr. Perks to his wife as they went
to bed.

“Oh, they're all right, bless their hearts,” said his wife; “it's you
that's the aggravatingest old thing that ever was. I was ashamed of
you--I tell you--”

“You didn't need to be, old gal. I climbed down handsome soon as I
understood it wasn't charity. But charity's what I never did abide, and
won't neither.”

          *          *          *          *          *          *

All sorts of people were made happy by that birthday party. Mr. Perks
and Mrs. Perks and the little Perkses by all the nice things and by the
kind thoughts of their neighbours; the Three Chimneys children by the
success, undoubted though unexpectedly delayed, of their plan; and Mrs.
Ransome every time she saw the fat Perks baby in the perambulator.
Mrs. Perks made quite a round of visits to thank people for their kind
birthday presents, and after each visit felt that she had a better
friend than she had thought.

“Yes,” said Perks, reflectively, “it's not so much what you does as what
you means; that's what I say. Now if it had been charity--”

“Oh, drat charity,” said Mrs. Perks; “nobody won't offer you
charity, Bert, however much you was to want it, I lay. That was just
friendliness, that was.”

When the clergyman called on Mrs. Perks, she told him all about it. “It
WAS friendliness, wasn't it, Sir?” said she.

“I think,” said the clergyman, “it was what is sometimes called
loving-kindness.”

So you see it was all right in the end. But if one does that sort of
thing, one has to be careful to do it in the right way. For, as Mr.
Perks said, when he had time to think it over, it's not so much what you
do, as what you mean.



Chapter X. The terrible secret.


When they first went to live at Three Chimneys, the children had talked
a great deal about their Father, and had asked a great many questions
about him, and what he was doing and where he was and when he would come
home. Mother always answered their questions as well as she could. But
as the time went on they grew to speak less of him. Bobbie had felt
almost from the first that for some strange miserable reason these
questions hurt Mother and made her sad. And little by little the others
came to have this feeling, too, though they could not have put it into
words.

One day, when Mother was working so hard that she could not leave off
even for ten minutes, Bobbie carried up her tea to the big bare room
that they called Mother's workshop. It had hardly any furniture. Just
a table and a chair and a rug. But always big pots of flowers on the
window-sills and on the mantelpiece. The children saw to that. And from
the three long uncurtained windows the beautiful stretch of meadow and
moorland, the far violet of the hills, and the unchanging changefulness
of cloud and sky.

“Here's your tea, Mother-love,” said Bobbie; “do drink it while it's
hot.”

Mother laid down her pen among the pages that were scattered all over
the table, pages covered with her writing, which was almost as plain
as print, and much prettier. She ran her hands into her hair, as if she
were going to pull it out by handfuls.

“Poor dear head,” said Bobbie, “does it ache?”

“No--yes--not much,” said Mother. “Bobbie, do you think Peter and Phil
are FORGETTING Father?”

“NO,” said Bobbie, indignantly. “Why?”

“You none of you ever speak of him now.”

Bobbie stood first on one leg and then on the other.

“We often talk about him when we're by ourselves,” she said.

“But not to me,” said Mother. “Why?”

Bobbie did not find it easy to say why.

“I--you--” she said and stopped. She went over to the window and looked
out.

“Bobbie, come here,” said her Mother, and Bobbie came.

“Now,” said Mother, putting her arm round Bobbie and laying her ruffled
head against Bobbie's shoulder, “try to tell me, dear.”

Bobbie fidgeted.

“Tell Mother.”

“Well, then,” said Bobbie, “I thought you were so unhappy about Daddy
not being here, it made you worse when I talked about him. So I stopped
doing it.”

“And the others?”

“I don't know about the others,” said Bobbie. “I never said anything
about THAT to them. But I expect they felt the same about it as me.”

“Bobbie dear,” said Mother, still leaning her head against her, “I'll
tell you. Besides parting from Father, he and I have had a great
sorrow--oh, terrible--worse than anything you can think of, and at first
it did hurt to hear you all talking of him as if everything were just
the same. But it would be much more terrible if you were to forget him.
That would be worse than anything.”

“The trouble,” said Bobbie, in a very little voice--“I promised I
would never ask you any questions, and I never have, have I? But--the
trouble--it won't last always?”

“No,” said Mother, “the worst will be over when Father comes home to
us.”

“I wish I could comfort you,” said Bobbie.

“Oh, my dear, do you suppose you don't? Do you think I haven't noticed
how good you've all been, not quarrelling nearly as much as you used
to--and all the little kind things you do for me--the flowers, and
cleaning my shoes, and tearing up to make my bed before I get time to do
it myself?”

Bobbie HAD sometimes wondered whether Mother noticed these things.

“That's nothing,” she said, “to what--”

“I MUST get on with my work,” said Mother, giving Bobbie one last
squeeze. “Don't say anything to the others.”

That evening in the hour before bed-time instead of reading to the
children Mother told them stories of the games she and Father used
to have when they were children and lived near each other in the
country--tales of the adventures of Father with Mother's brothers when
they were all boys together. Very funny stories they were, and the
children laughed as they listened.

“Uncle Edward died before he was grown up, didn't he?” said Phyllis, as
Mother lighted the bedroom candles.

“Yes, dear,” said Mother, “you would have loved him. He was such a
brave boy, and so adventurous. Always in mischief, and yet friends with
everybody in spite of it. And your Uncle Reggie's in Ceylon--yes, and
Father's away, too. But I think they'd all like to think we'd enjoyed
talking about the things they used to do. Don't you think so?”

“Not Uncle Edward,” said Phyllis, in a shocked tone; “he's in Heaven.”

“You don't suppose he's forgotten us and all the old times, because God
has taken him, any more than I forget him. Oh, no, he remembers. He's
only away for a little time. We shall see him some day.”

“And Uncle Reggie--and Father, too?” said Peter.

“Yes,” said Mother. “Uncle Reggie and Father, too. Good night, my
darlings.”

“Good night,” said everyone. Bobbie hugged her mother more closely even
than usual, and whispered in her ear, “Oh, I do love you so, Mummy--I
do--I do--”

When Bobbie came to think it all over, she tried not to wonder what
the great trouble was. But she could not always help it. Father was not
dead--like poor Uncle Edward--Mother had said so. And he was not ill, or
Mother would have been with him. Being poor wasn't the trouble. Bobbie
knew it was something nearer the heart than money could be.

“I mustn't try to think what it is,” she told herself; “no, I mustn't. I
AM glad Mother noticed about us not quarrelling so much. We'll keep that
up.”

And alas, that very afternoon she and Peter had what Peter called a
first-class shindy.

They had not been a week at Three Chimneys before they had asked Mother
to let them have a piece of garden each for their very own, and she had
agreed, and the south border under the peach trees had been divided into
three pieces and they were allowed to plant whatever they liked there.

Phyllis had planted mignonette and nasturtium and Virginia Stock in
hers. The seeds came up, and though they looked just like weeds, Phyllis
believed that they would bear flowers some day. The Virginia Stock
justified her faith quite soon, and her garden was gay with a band of
bright little flowers, pink and white and red and mauve.

“I can't weed for fear I pull up the wrong things,” she used to say
comfortably; “it saves such a lot of work.”

Peter sowed vegetable seeds in his--carrots and onions and turnips.
The seed was given to him by the farmer who lived in the nice
black-and-white, wood-and-plaster house just beyond the bridge. He
kept turkeys and guinea fowls, and was a most amiable man. But Peter's
vegetables never had much of a chance, because he liked to use the earth
of his garden for digging canals, and making forts and earthworks for
his toy soldiers. And the seeds of vegetables rarely come to much in
a soil that is constantly disturbed for the purposes of war and
irrigation.

Bobbie planted rose-bushes in her garden, but all the little new leaves
of the rose-bushes shrivelled and withered, perhaps because she moved
them from the other part of the garden in May, which is not at all the
right time of year for moving roses. But she would not own that they
were dead, and hoped on against hope, until the day when Perks came up
to see the garden, and told her quite plainly that all her roses were as
dead as doornails.

“Only good for bonfires, Miss,” he said. “You just dig 'em up and burn
'em, and I'll give you some nice fresh roots outer my garden; pansies,
and stocks, and sweet willies, and forget-me-nots. I'll bring 'em along
to-morrow if you get the ground ready.”

So next day she set to work, and that happened to be the day when Mother
had praised her and the others about not quarrelling. She moved the
rose-bushes and carried them to the other end of the garden, where the
rubbish heap was that they meant to make a bonfire of when Guy Fawkes'
Day came.

Meanwhile Peter had decided to flatten out all his forts and earthworks,
with a view to making a model of the railway-tunnel, cutting,
embankment, canal, aqueduct, bridges, and all.

So when Bobbie came back from her last thorny journey with the dead
rose-bushes, he had got the rake and was using it busily.

“_I_ was using the rake,” said Bobbie.

“Well, I'm using it now,” said Peter.

“But I had it first,” said Bobbie.

“Then it's my turn now,” said Peter. And that was how the quarrel began.

“You're always being disagreeable about nothing,” said Peter, after some
heated argument.

“I had the rake first,” said Bobbie, flushed and defiant, holding on to
its handle.

“Don't--I tell you I said this morning I meant to have it. Didn't I,
Phil?”

Phyllis said she didn't want to be mixed up in their rows. And
instantly, of course, she was.

“If you remember, you ought to say.”

“Of course she doesn't remember--but she might say so.”

“I wish I'd had a brother instead of two whiny little kiddy sisters,”
 said Peter. This was always recognised as indicating the high-water mark
of Peter's rage.

Bobbie made the reply she always made to it.

“I can't think why little boys were ever invented,” and just as she said
it she looked up, and saw the three long windows of Mother's workshop
flashing in the red rays of the sun. The sight brought back those words
of praise:--

“You don't quarrel like you used to do.”

“OH!” cried Bobbie, just as if she had been hit, or had caught her
finger in a door, or had felt the hideous sharp beginnings of toothache.

“What's the matter?” said Phyllis.

Bobbie wanted to say: “Don't let's quarrel. Mother hates it so,” but
though she tried hard, she couldn't. Peter was looking too disagreeable
and insulting.

“Take the horrid rake, then,” was the best she could manage. And she
suddenly let go her hold on the handle. Peter had been holding on to
it too firmly and pullingly, and now that the pull the other way was
suddenly stopped, he staggered and fell over backward, the teeth of the
rake between his feet.

“Serve you right,” said Bobbie, before she could stop herself.

Peter lay still for half a moment--long enough to frighten Bobbie a
little. Then he frightened her a little more, for he sat up--screamed
once--turned rather pale, and then lay back and began to shriek, faintly
but steadily. It sounded exactly like a pig being killed a quarter of a
mile off.

Mother put her head out of the window, and it wasn't half a minute after
that she was in the garden kneeling by the side of Peter, who never for
an instant ceased to squeal.

“What happened, Bobbie?” Mother asked.

“It was the rake,” said Phyllis. “Peter was pulling at it, so was
Bobbie, and she let go and he went over.”

“Stop that noise, Peter,” said Mother. “Come. Stop at once.”

Peter used up what breath he had left in a last squeal and stopped.

“Now,” said Mother, “are you hurt?”

“If he was really hurt, he wouldn't make such a fuss,” said Bobbie,
still trembling with fury; “he's not a coward!”

“I think my foot's broken off, that's all,” said Peter, huffily, and sat
up. Then he turned quite white. Mother put her arm round him.

“He IS hurt,” she said; “he's fainted. Here, Bobbie, sit down and take
his head on your lap.”

Then Mother undid Peter's boots. As she took the right one off,
something dripped from his foot on to the ground. It was red blood. And
when the stocking came off there were three red wounds in Peter's foot
and ankle, where the teeth of the rake had bitten him, and his foot was
covered with red smears.

“Run for water--a basinful,” said Mother, and Phyllis ran. She upset
most of the water out of the basin in her haste, and had to fetch more
in a jug.

Peter did not open his eyes again till Mother had tied her handkerchief
round his foot, and she and Bobbie had carried him in and laid him on
the brown wooden settle in the dining-room. By this time Phyllis was
halfway to the Doctor's.

Mother sat by Peter and bathed his foot and talked to him, and Bobbie
went out and got tea ready, and put on the kettle.

“It's all I can do,” she told herself. “Oh, suppose Peter should die, or
be a helpless cripple for life, or have to walk with crutches, or wear a
boot with a sole like a log of wood!”

She stood by the back door reflecting on these gloomy possibilities, her
eyes fixed on the water-butt.

“I wish I'd never been born,” she said, and she said it out loud.

“Why, lawk a mercy, what's that for?” asked a voice, and Perks stood
before her with a wooden trug basket full of green-leaved things and
soft, loose earth.

“Oh, it's you,” she said. “Peter's hurt his foot with a rake--three
great gaping wounds, like soldiers get. And it was partly my fault.”

“That it wasn't, I'll go bail,” said Perks. “Doctor seen him?”

“Phyllis has gone for the Doctor.”

“He'll be all right; you see if he isn't,” said Perks. “Why, my father's
second cousin had a hay-fork run into him, right into his inside, and he
was right as ever in a few weeks, all except his being a bit weak in
the head afterwards, and they did say that it was along of his getting
a touch of the sun in the hay-field, and not the fork at all. I remember
him well. A kind-'earted chap, but soft, as you might say.”

Bobbie tried to let herself be cheered by this heartening reminiscence.

“Well,” said Perks, “you won't want to be bothered with gardening just
this minute, I dare say. You show me where your garden is, and I'll
pop the bits of stuff in for you. And I'll hang about, if I may make so
free, to see the Doctor as he comes out and hear what he says. You cheer
up, Missie. I lay a pound he ain't hurt, not to speak of.”

But he was. The Doctor came and looked at the foot and bandaged it
beautifully, and said that Peter must not put it to the ground for at
least a week.

“He won't be lame, or have to wear crutches or a lump on his foot, will
he?” whispered Bobbie, breathlessly, at the door.

“My aunt! No!” said Dr. Forrest; “he'll be as nimble as ever on his pins
in a fortnight. Don't you worry, little Mother Goose.”

It was when Mother had gone to the gate with the Doctor to take his last
instructions and Phyllis was filling the kettle for tea, that Peter and
Bobbie found themselves alone.

“He says you won't be lame or anything,” said Bobbie.

“Oh, course I shan't, silly,” said Peter, very much relieved all the
same.

“Oh, Peter, I AM so sorry,” said Bobbie, after a pause.

“That's all right,” said Peter, gruffly.

“It was ALL my fault,” said Bobbie.

“Rot,” said Peter.

“If we hadn't quarrelled, it wouldn't have happened. I knew it was wrong
to quarrel. I wanted to say so, but somehow I couldn't.”

“Don't drivel,” said Peter. “I shouldn't have stopped if you HAD said
it. Not likely. And besides, us rowing hadn't anything to do with it.
I might have caught my foot in the hoe, or taken off my fingers in the
chaff-cutting machine or blown my nose off with fireworks. It would have
been hurt just the same whether we'd been rowing or not.”

“But I knew it was wrong to quarrel,” said Bobbie, in tears, “and now
you're hurt and--”

“Now look here,” said Peter, firmly, “you just dry up. If you're not
careful, you'll turn into a beastly little Sunday-school prig, so I tell
you.”

“I don't mean to be a prig. But it's so hard not to be when you're
really trying to be good.”

(The Gentle Reader may perhaps have suffered from this difficulty.)

“Not it,” said Peter; “it's a jolly good thing it wasn't you was hurt.
I'm glad it was ME. There! If it had been you, you'd have been lying
on the sofa looking like a suffering angel and being the light of the
anxious household and all that. And I couldn't have stood it.”

“No, I shouldn't,” said Bobbie.

“Yes, you would,” said Peter.

“I tell you I shouldn't.”

“I tell you you would.”

“Oh, children,” said Mother's voice at the door. “Quarrelling again?
Already?”

“We aren't quarrelling--not really,” said Peter. “I wish you wouldn't
think it's rows every time we don't agree!” When Mother had gone out
again, Bobbie broke out:--

“Peter, I AM sorry you're hurt. But you ARE a beast to say I'm a prig.”

“Well,” said Peter unexpectedly, “perhaps I am. You did say I wasn't a
coward, even when you were in such a wax. The only thing is--don't
you be a prig, that's all. You keep your eyes open and if you feel
priggishness coming on just stop in time. See?”

“Yes,” said Bobbie, “I see.”

“Then let's call it Pax,” said Peter, magnanimously: “bury the hatchet
in the fathoms of the past. Shake hands on it. I say, Bobbie, old chap,
I am tired.”

He was tired for many days after that, and the settle seemed hard and
uncomfortable in spite of all the pillows and bolsters and soft folded
rugs. It was terrible not to be able to go out. They moved the settle
to the window, and from there Peter could see the smoke of the trains
winding along the valley. But he could not see the trains.

At first Bobbie found it quite hard to be as nice to him as she wanted
to be, for fear he should think her priggish. But that soon wore off,
and both she and Phyllis were, as he observed, jolly good sorts. Mother
sat with him when his sisters were out. And the words, “he's not a
coward,” made Peter determined not to make any fuss about the pain in
his foot, though it was rather bad, especially at night.

Praise helps people very much, sometimes.

There were visitors, too. Mrs. Perks came up to ask how he was, and so
did the Station Master, and several of the village people. But the time
went slowly, slowly.

“I do wish there was something to read,” said Peter. “I've read all our
books fifty times over.”

“I'll go to the Doctor's,” said Phyllis; “he's sure to have some.”

“Only about how to be ill, and about people's nasty insides, I expect,”
 said Peter.

“Perks has a whole heap of Magazines that came out of trains when people
are tired of them,” said Bobbie. “I'll run down and ask him.”

So the girls went their two ways.

Bobbie found Perks busy cleaning lamps.

“And how's the young gent?” said he.

“Better, thanks,” said Bobbie, “but he's most frightfully bored. I came
to ask if you'd got any Magazines you could lend him.”

“There, now,” said Perks, regretfully, rubbing his ear with a black
and oily lump of cotton waste, “why didn't I think of that, now? I was
trying to think of something as 'ud amuse him only this morning, and I
couldn't think of anything better than a guinea-pig. And a young chap I
know's going to fetch that over for him this tea-time.”

“How lovely! A real live guinea! He will be pleased. But he'd like the
Magazines as well.”

“That's just it,” said Perks. “I've just sent the pick of 'em to
Snigson's boy--him what's just getting over the pewmonia. But I've lots
of illustrated papers left.”

He turned to the pile of papers in the corner and took up a heap six
inches thick.

“There!” he said. “I'll just slip a bit of string and a bit of paper
round 'em.”

He pulled an old newspaper from the pile and spread it on the table, and
made a neat parcel of it.

“There,” said he, “there's lots of pictures, and if he likes to mess 'em
about with his paint-box, or coloured chalks or what not, why, let him.
_I_ don't want 'em.”

“You're a dear,” said Bobbie, took the parcel, and started. The papers
were heavy, and when she had to wait at the level-crossing while a train
went by, she rested the parcel on the top of the gate. And idly she
looked at the printing on the paper that the parcel was wrapped in.

Suddenly she clutched the parcel tighter and bent her head over it. It
seemed like some horrible dream. She read on--the bottom of the column
was torn off--she could read no farther.

She never remembered how she got home. But she went on tiptoe to her
room and locked the door. Then she undid the parcel and read that
printed column again, sitting on the edge of her bed, her hands and feet
icy cold and her face burning. When she had read all there was, she drew
a long, uneven breath.

“So now I know,” she said.

What she had read was headed, 'End of the Trial. Verdict. Sentence.'

The name of the man who had been tried was the name of her Father.
The verdict was 'Guilty.' And the sentence was 'Five years' Penal
Servitude.'

“Oh, Daddy,” she whispered, crushing the paper hard, “it's not true--I
don't believe it. You never did it! Never, never, never!”

There was a hammering on the door.

“What is it?” said Bobbie.

“It's me,” said the voice of Phyllis; “tea's ready, and a boy's brought
Peter a guinea-pig. Come along down.”

And Bobbie had to.



Chapter XI. The hound in the red jersey.


Bobbie knew the secret now. A sheet of old newspaper wrapped round a
parcel--just a little chance like that--had given the secret to her. And
she had to go down to tea and pretend that there was nothing the matter.
The pretence was bravely made, but it wasn't very successful.

For when she came in, everyone looked up from tea and saw her
pink-lidded eyes and her pale face with red tear-blotches on it.

“My darling,” cried Mother, jumping up from the tea-tray, “whatever IS
the matter?”

“My head aches, rather,” said Bobbie. And indeed it did.

“Has anything gone wrong?” Mother asked.

“I'm all right, really,” said Bobbie, and she telegraphed to her Mother
from her swollen eyes this brief, imploring message--“NOT before the
others!”

Tea was not a cheerful meal. Peter was so distressed by the obvious fact
that something horrid had happened to Bobbie that he limited his speech
to repeating, “More bread and butter, please,” at startlingly short
intervals. Phyllis stroked her sister's hand under the table to express
sympathy, and knocked her cup over as she did it. Fetching a cloth and
wiping up the spilt milk helped Bobbie a little. But she thought that
tea would never end. Yet at last it did end, as all things do at last,
and when Mother took out the tray, Bobbie followed her.

“She's gone to own up,” said Phyllis to Peter; “I wonder what she's
done.”

“Broken something, I suppose,” said Peter, “but she needn't be so silly
over it. Mother never rows for accidents. Listen! Yes, they're going
upstairs. She's taking Mother up to show her--the water-jug with storks
on it, I expect it is.”

Bobbie, in the kitchen, had caught hold of Mother's hand as she set down
the tea-things.

“What is it?” Mother asked.

But Bobbie only said, “Come upstairs, come up where nobody can hear us.”

When she had got Mother alone in her room she locked the door and then
stood quite still, and quite without words.

All through tea she had been thinking of what to say; she had decided
that “I know all,” or “All is known to me,” or “The terrible secret is
a secret no longer,” would be the proper thing. But now that she and
her Mother and that awful sheet of newspaper were alone in the room
together, she found that she could say nothing.

Suddenly she went to Mother and put her arms round her and began to cry
again. And still she could find no words, only, “Oh, Mammy, oh, Mammy,
oh, Mammy,” over and over again.

Mother held her very close and waited.

Suddenly Bobbie broke away from her and went to her bed. From under her
mattress she pulled out the paper she had hidden there, and held it out,
pointing to her Father's name with a finger that shook.

“Oh, Bobbie,” Mother cried, when one little quick look had shown her
what it was, “you don't BELIEVE it? You don't believe Daddy did it?”

“NO,” Bobbie almost shouted. She had stopped crying.

“That's all right,” said Mother. “It's not true. And they've shut him
up in prison, but he's done nothing wrong. He's good and noble and
honourable, and he belongs to us. We have to think of that, and be proud
of him, and wait.”

Again Bobbie clung to her Mother, and again only one word came to her,
but now that word was “Daddy,” and “Oh, Daddy, oh, Daddy, oh, Daddy!”
 again and again.

“Why didn't you tell me, Mammy?” she asked presently.

“Are you going to tell the others?” Mother asked.

“No.”

“Why?”

“Because--”

“Exactly,” said Mother; “so you understand why I didn't tell you. We two
must help each other to be brave.”

“Yes,” said Bobbie; “Mother, will it make you more unhappy if you tell
me all about it? I want to understand.”

So then, sitting cuddled up close to her Mother, Bobbie heard “all
about it.” She heard how those men, who had asked to see Father on that
remembered last night when the Engine was being mended, had come
to arrest him, charging him with selling State secrets to the
Russians--with being, in fact, a spy and a traitor. She heard about the
trial, and about the evidence--letters, found in Father's desk at the
office, letters that convinced the jury that Father was guilty.

“Oh, how could they look at him and believe it!” cried Bobbie; “and how
could ANY one do such a thing!”

“SOMEONE did it,” said Mother, “and all the evidence was against Father.
Those letters--”

“Yes. How did the letters get into his desk?”

“Someone put them there. And the person who put them there was the
person who was really guilty.”

“HE must be feeling pretty awful all this time,” said Bobbie,
thoughtfully.

“I don't believe he had any feelings,” Mother said hotly; “he couldn't
have done a thing like that if he had.”

“Perhaps he just shoved the letters into the desk to hide them when he
thought he was going to be found out. Why don't you tell the lawyers,
or someone, that it must have been that person? There wasn't anyone that
would have hurt Father on purpose, was there?”

“I don't know--I don't know. The man under him who got Daddy's place
when he--when the awful thing happened--he was always jealous of your
Father because Daddy was so clever and everyone thought such a lot of
him. And Daddy never quite trusted that man.”

“Couldn't we explain all that to someone?”

“Nobody will listen,” said Mother, very bitterly, “nobody at all. Do you
suppose I've not tried everything? No, my dearest, there's nothing to be
done. All we can do, you and I and Daddy, is to be brave, and patient,
and--” she spoke very softly--“to pray, Bobbie, dear.”

“Mother, you've got very thin,” said Bobbie, abruptly.

“A little, perhaps.”

“And oh,” said Bobbie, “I do think you're the bravest person in the
world as well as the nicest!”

“We won't talk of all this any more, will we, dear?” said Mother; “we
must bear it and be brave. And, darling, try not to think of it. Try to
be cheerful, and to amuse yourself and the others. It's much easier for
me if you can be a little bit happy and enjoy things. Wash your poor
little round face, and let's go out into the garden for a bit.”

The other two were very gentle and kind to Bobbie. And they did not
ask her what was the matter. This was Peter's idea, and he had drilled
Phyllis, who would have asked a hundred questions if she had been left
to herself.

A week later Bobbie managed to get away alone. And once more she wrote a
letter. And once more it was to the old gentleman.

“My dear Friend,” she said, “you see what is in this paper. It is
not true. Father never did it. Mother says someone put the papers in
Father's desk, and she says the man under him that got Father's place
afterwards was jealous of Father, and Father suspected him a long time.
But nobody listens to a word she says, but you are so good and clever,
and you found out about the Russian gentleman's wife directly. Can't you
find out who did the treason because he wasn't Father upon my honour;
he is an Englishman and uncapable to do such things, and then they would
let Father out of prison. It is dreadful, and Mother is getting so thin.
She told us once to pray for all prisoners and captives. I see now.
Oh, do help me--there is only just Mother and me know, and we can't do
anything. Peter and Phil don't know. I'll pray for you twice every day
as long as I live if you'll only try--just try to find out. Think if it
was YOUR Daddy, what you would feel. Oh, do, do, DO help me. With love

“I remain Your affectionately little friend

“Roberta.

P.S. Mother would send her kind regards if she knew I am writing--but
it is no use telling her I am, in case you can't do anything. But I know
you will. Bobbie with best love.”

She cut the account of her Father's trial out of the newspaper with
Mother's big cutting-out scissors, and put it in the envelope with her
letter.

Then she took it down to the station, going out the back way and round
by the road, so that the others should not see her and offer to come
with her, and she gave the letter to the Station Master to give to the
old gentleman next morning.

“Where HAVE you been?” shouted Peter, from the top of the yard wall
where he and Phyllis were.

“To the station, of course,” said Bobbie; “give us a hand, Pete.”

She set her foot on the lock of the yard door. Peter reached down a
hand.

“What on earth?” she asked as she reached the wall-top--for Phyllis and
Peter were very muddy. A lump of wet clay lay between them on the wall,
they had each a slip of slate in a very dirty hand, and behind Peter,
out of the reach of accidents, were several strange rounded objects
rather like very fat sausages, hollow, but closed up at one end.

“It's nests,” said Peter, “swallows' nests. We're going to dry them
in the oven and hang them up with string under the eaves of the
coach-house.”

“Yes,” said Phyllis; “and then we're going to save up all the wool and
hair we can get, and in the spring we'll line them, and then how pleased
the swallows will be!”

“I've often thought people don't do nearly enough for dumb animals,”
 said Peter with an air of virtue. “I do think people might have thought
of making nests for poor little swallows before this.”

“Oh,” said Bobbie, vaguely, “if everybody thought of everything, there'd
be nothing left for anybody else to think about.”

“Look at the nests--aren't they pretty?” said Phyllis, reaching across
Peter to grasp a nest.

“Look out, Phil, you goat,” said her brother. But it was too late; her
strong little fingers had crushed the nest.

“There now,” said Peter.

“Never mind,” said Bobbie.

“It IS one of my own,” said Phyllis, “so you needn't jaw, Peter. Yes,
we've put our initial names on the ones we've done, so that the swallows
will know who they've got to be so grateful to and fond of.”

“Swallows can't read, silly,” said Peter.

“Silly yourself,” retorted Phyllis; “how do you know?”

“Who thought of making the nests, anyhow?” shouted Peter.

“I did,” screamed Phyllis.

“Nya,” rejoined Peter, “you only thought of making hay ones and sticking
them in the ivy for the sparrows, and they'd have been sopping LONG
before egg-laying time. It was me said clay and swallows.”

“I don't care what you said.”

“Look,” said Bobbie, “I've made the nest all right again. Give me the
bit of stick to mark your initial name on it. But how can you? Your
letter and Peter's are the same. P. for Peter, P. for Phyllis.”

“I put F. for Phyllis,” said the child of that name. “That's how
it sounds. The swallows wouldn't spell Phyllis with a P., I'm
certain-sure.”

“They can't spell at all,” Peter was still insisting.

“Then why do you see them always on Christmas cards and valentines
with letters round their necks? How would they know where to go if they
couldn't read?”

“That's only in pictures. You never saw one really with letters round
its neck.”

“Well, I have a pigeon, then; at least Daddy told me they did. Only it
was under their wings and not round their necks, but it comes to the
same thing, and--”

“I say,” interrupted Bobbie, “there's to be a paperchase to-morrow.”

“Who?” Peter asked.

“Grammar School. Perks thinks the hare will go along by the line at
first. We might go along the cutting. You can see a long way from
there.”

The paperchase was found to be a more amusing subject of conversation
than the reading powers of swallows. Bobbie had hoped it might be. And
next morning Mother let them take their lunch and go out for the day to
see the paperchase.

“If we go to the cutting,” said Peter, “we shall see the workmen, even
if we miss the paperchase.”

Of course it had taken some time to get the line clear from the rocks
and earth and trees that had fallen on it when the great landslip
happened. That was the occasion, you will remember, when the three
children saved the train from being wrecked by waving six little
red-flannel-petticoat flags. It is always interesting to watch people
working, especially when they work with such interesting things as
spades and picks and shovels and planks and barrows, when they have
cindery red fires in iron pots with round holes in them, and red lamps
hanging near the works at night. Of course the children were never
out at night; but once, at dusk, when Peter had got out of his bedroom
skylight on to the roof, he had seen the red lamp shining far away at
the edge of the cutting. The children had often been down to watch the
work, and this day the interest of picks and spades, and barrows being
wheeled along planks, completely put the paperchase out of their heads,
so that they quite jumped when a voice just behind them panted, “Let me
pass, please.” It was the hare--a big-boned, loose-limbed boy, with dark
hair lying flat on a very damp forehead. The bag of torn paper under
his arm was fastened across one shoulder by a strap. The children stood
back. The hare ran along the line, and the workmen leaned on their picks
to watch him. He ran on steadily and disappeared into the mouth of the
tunnel.

“That's against the by-laws,” said the foreman.

“Why worry?” said the oldest workman; “live and let live's what I always
say. Ain't you never been young yourself, Mr. Bates?”

“I ought to report him,” said the foreman.

“Why spoil sport's what I always say.”

“Passengers are forbidden to cross the line on any pretence,” murmured
the foreman, doubtfully.

“He ain't no passenger,” said one of the workmen.

“Nor 'e ain't crossed the line, not where we could see 'im do it,” said
another.

“Nor yet 'e ain't made no pretences,” said a third.

“And,” said the oldest workman, “'e's outer sight now. What the eye
don't see the 'art needn't take no notice of's what I always say.”

And now, following the track of the hare by the little white blots of
scattered paper, came the hounds. There were thirty of them, and they
all came down the steep, ladder-like steps by ones and twos and threes
and sixes and sevens. Bobbie and Phyllis and Peter counted them as they
passed. The foremost ones hesitated a moment at the foot of the ladder,
then their eyes caught the gleam of scattered whiteness along the line
and they turned towards the tunnel, and, by ones and twos and threes and
sixes and sevens, disappeared in the dark mouth of it. The last one, in
a red jersey, seemed to be extinguished by the darkness like a candle
that is blown out.

“They don't know what they're in for,” said the foreman; “it isn't so
easy running in the dark. The tunnel takes two or three turns.”

“They'll take a long time to get through, you think?” Peter asked.

“An hour or more, I shouldn't wonder.”

“Then let's cut across the top and see them come out at the other end,”
 said Peter; “we shall get there long before they do.”

The counsel seemed good, and they went.

They climbed the steep steps from which they had picked the wild cherry
blossom for the grave of the little wild rabbit, and reaching the top of
the cutting, set their faces towards the hill through which the tunnel
was cut. It was stiff work.

“It's like Alps,” said Bobbie, breathlessly.

“Or Andes,” said Peter.

“It's like Himmy what's its names?” gasped Phyllis. “Mount Everlasting.
Do let's stop.”

“Stick to it,” panted Peter; “you'll get your second wind in a minute.”

Phyllis consented to stick to it--and on they went, running when the
turf was smooth and the slope easy, climbing over stones, helping
themselves up rocks by the branches of trees, creeping through narrow
openings between tree trunks and rocks, and so on and on, up and up,
till at last they stood on the very top of the hill where they had so
often wished to be.

“Halt!” cried Peter, and threw himself flat on the grass. For the very
top of the hill was a smooth, turfed table-land, dotted with mossy rocks
and little mountain-ash trees.

The girls also threw themselves down flat.

“Plenty of time,” Peter panted; “the rest's all down hill.”

When they were rested enough to sit up and look round them, Bobbie
cried:--

“Oh, look!”

“What at?” said Phyllis.

“The view,” said Bobbie.

“I hate views,” said Phyllis, “don't you, Peter?”

“Let's get on,” said Peter.

“But this isn't like a view they take you to in carriages when you're
at the seaside, all sea and sand and bare hills. It's like the 'coloured
counties' in one of Mother's poetry books.”

“It's not so dusty,” said Peter; “look at the Aqueduct straddling slap
across the valley like a giant centipede, and then the towns sticking
their church spires up out of the trees like pens out of an inkstand.
_I_ think it's more like

     “There could he see the banners
      Of twelve fair cities shine.”

“I love it,” said Bobbie; “it's worth the climb.”

“The paperchase is worth the climb,” said Phyllis, “if we don't lose it.
Let's get on. It's all down hill now.”

“_I_ said that ten minutes ago,” said Peter.

“Well, I'VE said it now,” said Phyllis; “come on.”

“Loads of time,” said Peter. And there was. For when they had got down
to a level with the top of the tunnel's mouth--they were a couple of
hundred yards out of their reckoning and had to creep along the face of
the hill--there was no sign of the hare or the hounds.

“They've gone long ago, of course,” said Phyllis, as they leaned on the
brick parapet above the tunnel.

“I don't think so,” said Bobbie, “but even if they had, it's ripping
here, and we shall see the trains come out of the tunnel like dragons
out of lairs. We've never seen that from the top side before.”

“No more we have,” said Phyllis, partially appeased.

It was really a most exciting place to be in. The top of the tunnel
seemed ever so much farther from the line than they had expected, and
it was like being on a bridge, but a bridge overgrown with bushes and
creepers and grass and wild-flowers.

“I KNOW the paperchase has gone long ago,” said Phyllis every two
minutes, and she hardly knew whether she was pleased or disappointed
when Peter, leaning over the parapet, suddenly cried:--

“Look out. Here he comes!”

They all leaned over the sun-warmed brick wall in time to see the hare,
going very slowly, come out from the shadow of the tunnel.

“There, now,” said Peter, “what did I tell you? Now for the hounds!”

Very soon came the hounds--by ones and twos and threes and sixes and
sevens--and they also were going slowly and seemed very tired. Two or
three who lagged far behind came out long after the others.

“There,” said Bobbie, “that's all--now what shall we do?”

“Go along into the tulgy wood over there and have lunch,” said Phyllis;
“we can see them for miles from up here.”

“Not yet,” said Peter. “That's not the last. There's the one in the red
jersey to come yet. Let's see the last of them come out.”

But though they waited and waited and waited, the boy in the red jersey
did not appear.

“Oh, let's have lunch,” said Phyllis; “I've got a pain in my front with
being so hungry. You must have missed seeing the red-jerseyed one when
he came out with the others--”

But Bobbie and Peter agreed that he had not come out with the others.

“Let's get down to the tunnel mouth,” said Peter; “then perhaps we shall
see him coming along from the inside. I expect he felt spun-chuck, and
rested in one of the manholes. You stay up here and watch, Bob, and when
I signal from below, you come down. We might miss seeing him on the way
down, with all these trees.”

So the others climbed down and Bobbie waited till they signalled to her
from the line below. And then she, too, scrambled down the roundabout
slippery path among roots and moss till she stepped out between two
dogwood trees and joined the others on the line. And still there was no
sign of the hound with the red jersey.

“Oh, do, DO let's have something to eat,” wailed Phyllis. “I shall die
if you don't, and then you'll be sorry.”

“Give her the sandwiches, for goodness' sake, and stop her silly mouth,”
 said Peter, not quite unkindly. “Look here,” he added, turning to
Bobbie, “perhaps we'd better have one each, too. We may need all our
strength. Not more than one, though. There's no time.”

“What?” asked Bobbie, her mouth already full, for she was just as hungry
as Phyllis.

“Don't you see,” replied Peter, impressively, “that red-jerseyed hound
has had an accident--that's what it is. Perhaps even as we speak he's
lying with his head on the metals, an unresisting prey to any passing
express--”

“Oh, don't try to talk like a book,” cried Bobbie, bolting what was left
of her sandwich; “come on. Phil, keep close behind me, and if a train
comes, stand flat against the tunnel wall and hold your petticoats close
to you.”

“Give me one more sandwich,” pleaded Phyllis, “and I will.”

“I'm going first,” said Peter; “it was my idea,” and he went.

Of course you know what going into a tunnel is like? The engine gives
a scream and then suddenly the noise of the running, rattling train
changes and grows different and much louder. Grown-up people pull up the
windows and hold them by the strap. The railway carriage suddenly grows
like night--with lamps, of course, unless you are in a slow local train,
in which case lamps are not always provided. Then by and by the darkness
outside the carriage window is touched by puffs of cloudy whiteness,
then you see a blue light on the walls of the tunnel, then the sound of
the moving train changes once more, and you are out in the good open air
again, and grown-ups let the straps go. The windows, all dim with the
yellow breath of the tunnel, rattle down into their places, and you see
once more the dip and catch of the telegraph wires beside the line, and
the straight-cut hawthorn hedges with the tiny baby trees growing up out
of them every thirty yards.

All this, of course, is what a tunnel means when you are in a train. But
everything is quite different when you walk into a tunnel on your own
feet, and tread on shifting, sliding stones and gravel on a path that
curves downwards from the shining metals to the wall. Then you see
slimy, oozy trickles of water running down the inside of the tunnel,
and you notice that the bricks are not red or brown, as they are at the
tunnel's mouth, but dull, sticky, sickly green. Your voice, when you
speak, is quite changed from what it was out in the sunshine, and it is
a long time before the tunnel is quite dark.

It was not yet quite dark in the tunnel when Phyllis caught at Bobbie's
skirt, ripping out half a yard of gathers, but no one noticed this at
the time.

“I want to go back,” she said, “I don't like it. It'll be pitch dark
in a minute. I WON'T go on in the dark. I don't care what you say, I
WON'T.”

“Don't be a silly cuckoo,” said Peter; “I've got a candle end and
matches, and--what's that?”

“That” was a low, humming sound on the railway line, a trembling of the
wires beside it, a buzzing, humming sound that grew louder and louder as
they listened.

“It's a train,” said Bobbie.

“Which line?”

“Let me go back,” cried Phyllis, struggling to get away from the hand by
which Bobbie held her.

“Don't be a coward,” said Bobbie; “it's quite safe. Stand back.”

“Come on,” shouted Peter, who was a few yards ahead. “Quick! Manhole!”

The roar of the advancing train was now louder than the noise you hear
when your head is under water in the bath and both taps are running, and
you are kicking with your heels against the bath's tin sides. But Peter
had shouted for all he was worth, and Bobbie heard him. She dragged
Phyllis along to the manhole. Phyllis, of course, stumbled over the
wires and grazed both her legs. But they dragged her in, and all three
stood in the dark, damp, arched recess while the train roared louder and
louder. It seemed as if it would deafen them. And, in the distance, they
could see its eyes of fire growing bigger and brighter every instant.

“It IS a dragon--I always knew it was--it takes its own shape in here,
in the dark,” shouted Phyllis. But nobody heard her. You see the train
was shouting, too, and its voice was bigger than hers.

And now, with a rush and a roar and a rattle and a long dazzling flash
of lighted carriage windows, a smell of smoke, and blast of hot air, the
train hurtled by, clanging and jangling and echoing in the vaulted roof
of the tunnel. Phyllis and Bobbie clung to each other. Even Peter
caught hold of Bobbie's arm, “in case she should be frightened,” as he
explained afterwards.

And now, slowly and gradually, the tail-lights grew smaller and smaller,
and so did the noise, till with one last WHIZ the train got itself out
of the tunnel, and silence settled again on its damp walls and dripping
roof.

“OH!” said the children, all together in a whisper.

Peter was lighting the candle end with a hand that trembled.

“Come on,” he said; but he had to clear his throat before he could speak
in his natural voice.

“Oh,” said Phyllis, “if the red-jerseyed one was in the way of the
train!”

“We've got to go and see,” said Peter.

“Couldn't we go and send someone from the station?” said Phyllis.

“Would you rather wait here for us?” asked Bobbie, severely, and of
course that settled the question.

So the three went on into the deeper darkness of the tunnel. Peter led,
holding his candle end high to light the way. The grease ran down his
fingers, and some of it right up his sleeve. He found a long streak from
wrist to elbow when he went to bed that night.

It was not more than a hundred and fifty yards from the spot where
they had stood while the train went by that Peter stood still, shouted
“Hullo,” and then went on much quicker than before. When the others
caught him up, he stopped. And he stopped within a yard of what they had
come into the tunnel to look for. Phyllis saw a gleam of red, and
shut her eyes tight. There, by the curved, pebbly down line, was the
red-jerseyed hound. His back was against the wall, his arms hung limply
by his sides, and his eyes were shut.

“Was the red, blood? Is he all killed?” asked Phyllis, screwing her
eyelids more tightly together.

“Killed? Nonsense!” said Peter. “There's nothing red about him except
his jersey. He's only fainted. What on earth are we to do?”

“Can we move him?” asked Bobbie.

“I don't know; he's a big chap.”

“Suppose we bathe his forehead with water. No, I know we haven't any,
but milk's just as wet. There's a whole bottle.”

“Yes,” said Peter, “and they rub people's hands, I believe.”

“They burn feathers, I know,” said Phyllis.

“What's the good of saying that when we haven't any feathers?”

“As it happens,” said Phyllis, in a tone of exasperated triumph, “I've
got a shuttlecock in my pocket. So there!”

And now Peter rubbed the hands of the red-jerseyed one. Bobbie burned
the feathers of the shuttlecock one by one under his nose, Phyllis
splashed warmish milk on his forehead, and all three kept on saying as
fast and as earnestly as they could:--

“Oh, look up, speak to me! For my sake, speak!”



Chapter XII. What Bobbie brought home.


“Oh, look up! Speak to me! For MY sake, speak!” The children said the
words over and over again to the unconscious hound in a red jersey, who
sat with closed eyes and pale face against the side of the tunnel.

“Wet his ears with milk,” said Bobbie. “I know they do it to people that
faint--with eau-de-Cologne. But I expect milk's just as good.”

So they wetted his ears, and some of the milk ran down his neck under
the red jersey. It was very dark in the tunnel. The candle end Peter had
carried, and which now burned on a flat stone, gave hardly any light at
all.

“Oh, DO look up,” said Phyllis. “For MY sake! I believe he's dead.”

“For MY sake,” repeated Bobbie. “No, he isn't.”

“For ANY sake,” said Peter; “come out of it.” And he shook the sufferer
by the arm.

And then the boy in the red jersey sighed, and opened his eyes, and shut
them again and said in a very small voice, “Chuck it.”

“Oh, he's NOT dead,” said Phyllis. “I KNEW he wasn't,” and she began to
cry.

“What's up? I'm all right,” said the boy.

“Drink this,” said Peter, firmly, thrusting the nose of the milk bottle
into the boy's mouth. The boy struggled, and some of the milk was upset
before he could get his mouth free to say:--

“What is it?”

“It's milk,” said Peter. “Fear not, you are in the hands of friends.
Phil, you stop bleating this minute.”

“Do drink it,” said Bobbie, gently; “it'll do you good.”

So he drank. And the three stood by without speaking to him.

“Let him be a minute,” Peter whispered; “he'll be all right as soon as
the milk begins to run like fire through his veins.”

He was.

“I'm better now,” he announced. “I remember all about it.” He tried to
move, but the movement ended in a groan. “Bother! I believe I've broken
my leg,” he said.

“Did you tumble down?” asked Phyllis, sniffing.

“Of course not--I'm not a kiddie,” said the boy, indignantly; “it was
one of those beastly wires tripped me up, and when I tried to get up
again I couldn't stand, so I sat down. Gee whillikins! it does hurt,
though. How did YOU get here?”

“We saw you all go into the tunnel and then we went across the hill to
see you all come out. And the others did--all but you, and you didn't.
So we are a rescue party,” said Peter, with pride.

“You've got some pluck, I will say,” remarked the boy.

“Oh, that's nothing,” said Peter, with modesty. “Do you think you could
walk if we helped you?”

“I could try,” said the boy.

He did try. But he could only stand on one foot; the other dragged in a
very nasty way.

“Here, let me sit down. I feel like dying,” said the boy. “Let go of
me--let go, quick--” He lay down and closed his eyes. The others looked
at each other by the dim light of the little candle.

“What on earth!” said Peter.

“Look here,” said Bobbie, quickly, “you must go and get help. Go to the
nearest house.”

“Yes, that's the only thing,” said Peter. “Come on.”

“If you take his feet and Phil and I take his head, we could carry him
to the manhole.”

They did it. It was perhaps as well for the sufferer that he had fainted
again.

“Now,” said Bobbie, “I'll stay with him. You take the longest bit of
candle, and, oh--be quick, for this bit won't burn long.”

“I don't think Mother would like me leaving you,” said Peter,
doubtfully. “Let me stay, and you and Phil go.”

“No, no,” said Bobbie, “you and Phil go--and lend me your knife. I'll
try to get his boot off before he wakes up again.”

“I hope it's all right what we're doing,” said Peter.

“Of course it's right,” said Bobbie, impatiently. “What else WOULD you
do? Leave him here all alone because it's dark? Nonsense. Hurry up,
that's all.”

So they hurried up.

Bobbie watched their dark figures and the little light of the little
candle with an odd feeling of having come to the end of everything. She
knew now, she thought, what nuns who were bricked up alive in convent
walls felt like. Suddenly she gave herself a little shake.

“Don't be a silly little girl,” she said. She was always very angry when
anyone else called her a little girl, even if the adjective that went
first was not “silly” but “nice” or “good” or “clever.” And it was only
when she was very angry with herself that she allowed Roberta to use
that expression to Bobbie.

She fixed the little candle end on a broken brick near the red-jerseyed
boy's feet. Then she opened Peter's knife. It was always hard to
manage--a halfpenny was generally needed to get it open at all. This
time Bobbie somehow got it open with her thumbnail. She broke the nail,
and it hurt horribly. Then she cut the boy's bootlace, and got the boot
off. She tried to pull off his stocking, but his leg was dreadfully
swollen, and it did not seem to be the proper shape. So she cut the
stocking down, very slowly and carefully. It was a brown, knitted
stocking, and she wondered who had knitted it, and whether it was the
boy's mother, and whether she was feeling anxious about him, and how she
would feel when he was brought home with his leg broken. When Bobbie had
got the stocking off and saw the poor leg, she felt as though the tunnel
was growing darker, and the ground felt unsteady, and nothing seemed
quite real.

“SILLY little girl!” said Roberta to Bobbie, and felt better.

“The poor leg,” she told herself; “it ought to have a cushion--ah!”

She remembered the day when she and Phyllis had torn up their red
flannel petticoats to make danger signals to stop the train and prevent
an accident. Her flannel petticoat to-day was white, but it would be
quite as soft as a red one. She took it off.

“Oh, what useful things flannel petticoats are!” she said; “the man who
invented them ought to have a statue directed to him.” And she said
it aloud, because it seemed that any voice, even her own, would be a
comfort in that darkness.

“WHAT ought to be directed? Who to?” asked the boy, suddenly and very
feebly.

“Oh,” said Bobbie, “now you're better! Hold your teeth and don't let it
hurt too much. Now!”

She had folded the petticoat, and lifting his leg laid it on the cushion
of folded flannel.

“Don't faint again, PLEASE don't,” said Bobbie, as he groaned. She
hastily wetted her handkerchief with milk and spread it over the poor
leg.

“Oh, that hurts,” cried the boy, shrinking. “Oh--no, it doesn't--it's
nice, really.”

“What's your name?” said Bobbie.

“Jim.”

“Mine's Bobbie.”

“But you're a girl, aren't you?”

“Yes, my long name's Roberta.”

“I say--Bobbie.”

“Yes?”

“Wasn't there some more of you just now?”

“Yes, Peter and Phil--that's my brother and sister. They've gone to get
someone to carry you out.”

“What rum names. All boys'.”

“Yes--I wish I was a boy, don't you?”

“I think you're all right as you are.”

“I didn't mean that--I meant don't you wish YOU were a boy, but of
course you are without wishing.”

“You're just as brave as a boy. Why didn't you go with the others?”

“Somebody had to stay with you,” said Bobbie.

“Tell you what, Bobbie,” said Jim, “you're a brick. Shake.” He reached
out a red-jerseyed arm and Bobbie squeezed his hand.

“I won't shake it,” she explained, “because it would shake YOU, and that
would shake your poor leg, and that would hurt. Have you got a hanky?”

“I don't expect I have.” He felt in his pocket. “Yes, I have. What for?”

She took it and wetted it with milk and put it on his forehead.

“That's jolly,” he said; “what is it?”

“Milk,” said Bobbie. “We haven't any water--”

“You're a jolly good little nurse,” said Jim.

“I do it for Mother sometimes,” said Bobbie--“not milk, of course,
but scent, or vinegar and water. I say, I must put the candle out now,
because there mayn't be enough of the other one to get you out by.”

“By George,” said he, “you think of everything.”

Bobbie blew. Out went the candle. You have no idea how black-velvety the
darkness was.

“I say, Bobbie,” said a voice through the blackness, “aren't you afraid
of the dark?”

“Not--not very, that is--”

“Let's hold hands,” said the boy, and it was really rather good of him,
because he was like most boys of his age and hated all material tokens
of affection, such as kissing and holding of hands. He called all such
things “pawings,” and detested them.

The darkness was more bearable to Bobbie now that her hand was held in
the large rough hand of the red-jerseyed sufferer; and he, holding her
little smooth hot paw, was surprised to find that he did not mind it so
much as he expected. She tried to talk, to amuse him, and “take his mind
off” his sufferings, but it is very difficult to go on talking in the
dark, and presently they found themselves in a silence, only broken now
and then by a--

“You all right, Bobbie?”

or an--

“I'm afraid it's hurting you most awfully, Jim. I AM so sorry.”

And it was very cold.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Peter and Phyllis tramped down the long way of the tunnel towards
daylight, the candle-grease dripping over Peter's fingers. There were no
accidents unless you count Phyllis's catching her frock on a wire, and
tearing a long, jagged slit in it, and tripping over her bootlace when
it came undone, or going down on her hands and knees, all four of which
were grazed.

“There's no end to this tunnel,” said Phyllis--and indeed it did seem
very very long.

“Stick to it,” said Peter; “everything has an end, and you get to it if
you only keep all on.”

Which is quite true, if you come to think of it, and a useful thing
to remember in seasons of trouble--such as measles, arithmetic,
impositions, and those times when you are in disgrace, and feel as
though no one would ever love you again, and you could never--never
again--love anybody.

“Hurray,” said Peter, suddenly, “there's the end of the tunnel--looks
just like a pin-hole in a bit of black paper, doesn't it?”

The pin-hole got larger--blue lights lay along the sides of the tunnel.
The children could see the gravel way that lay in front of them; the air
grew warmer and sweeter. Another twenty steps and they were out in the
good glad sunshine with the green trees on both sides.

Phyllis drew a long breath.

“I'll never go into a tunnel again as long as ever I live,” said she,
“not if there are twenty hundred thousand millions hounds inside with
red jerseys and their legs broken.”

“Don't be a silly cuckoo,” said Peter, as usual. “You'd HAVE to.”

“I think it was very brave and good of me,” said Phyllis.

“Not it,” said Peter; “you didn't go because you were brave, but because
Bobbie and I aren't skunks. Now where's the nearest house, I wonder? You
can't see anything here for the trees.”

“There's a roof over there,” said Phyllis, pointing down the line.

“That's the signal-box,” said Peter, “and you know you're not allowed to
speak to signalmen on duty. It's wrong.”

“I'm not near so afraid of doing wrong as I was of going into that
tunnel,” said Phyllis. “Come on,” and she started to run along the line.
So Peter ran, too.

It was very hot in the sunshine, and both children were hot and
breathless by the time they stopped, and bending their heads back to
look up at the open windows of the signal-box, shouted “Hi!” as loud
as their breathless state allowed. But no one answered. The signal-box
stood quiet as an empty nursery, and the handrail of its steps was hot
to the hands of the children as they climbed softly up. They peeped
in at the open door. The signalman was sitting on a chair tilted back
against the wall. His head leaned sideways, and his mouth was open. He
was fast asleep.

“My hat!” cried Peter; “wake up!” And he cried it in a terrible voice,
for he knew that if a signalman sleeps on duty, he risks losing his
situation, let alone all the other dreadful risks to trains which expect
him to tell them when it is safe for them to go their ways.

The signalman never moved. Then Peter sprang to him and shook him. And
slowly, yawning and stretching, the man awoke. But the moment he WAS
awake he leapt to his feet, put his hands to his head “like a mad
maniac,” as Phyllis said afterwards, and shouted:--

“Oh, my heavens--what's o'clock?”

“Twelve thirteen,” said Peter, and indeed it was by the white-faced,
round-faced clock on the wall of the signal-box.

The man looked at the clock, sprang to the levers, and wrenched them
this way and that. An electric bell tingled--the wires and cranks
creaked, and the man threw himself into a chair. He was very pale,
and the sweat stood on his forehead “like large dewdrops on a white
cabbage,” as Phyllis remarked later. He was trembling, too; the children
could see his big hairy hands shake from side to side, “with quite
extra-sized trembles,” to use the subsequent words of Peter. He drew
long breaths. Then suddenly he cried, “Thank God, thank God you come in
when you did--oh, thank God!” and his shoulders began to heave and his
face grew red again, and he hid it in those large hairy hands of his.

“Oh, don't cry--don't,” said Phyllis, “it's all right now,” and she
patted him on one big, broad shoulder, while Peter conscientiously
thumped the other.

But the signalman seemed quite broken down, and the children had to
pat him and thump him for quite a long time before he found his
handkerchief--a red one with mauve and white horseshoes on it--and
mopped his face and spoke. During this patting and thumping interval a
train thundered by.

“I'm downright shamed, that I am,” were the words of the big signalman
when he had stopped crying; “snivelling like a kid.” Then suddenly he
seemed to get cross. “And what was you doing up here, anyway?” he said;
“you know it ain't allowed.”

“Yes,” said Phyllis, “we knew it was wrong--but I wasn't afraid of doing
wrong, and so it turned out right. You aren't sorry we came.”

“Lor' love you--if you hadn't 'a' come--” he stopped and then went on.
“It's a disgrace, so it is, sleeping on duty. If it was to come to be
known--even as it is, when no harm's come of it.”

“It won't come to be known,” said Peter; “we aren't sneaks. All the
same, you oughtn't to sleep on duty--it's dangerous.”

“Tell me something I don't know,” said the man, “but I can't help it.
I know'd well enough just how it 'ud be. But I couldn't get off. They
couldn't get no one to take on my duty. I tell you I ain't had ten
minutes' sleep this last five days. My little chap's ill--pewmonia, the
Doctor says--and there's no one but me and 'is little sister to do for
him. That's where it is. The gell must 'ave her sleep. Dangerous? Yes, I
believe you. Now go and split on me if you like.”

“Of course we won't,” said Peter, indignantly, but Phyllis ignored the
whole of the signalman's speech, except the first six words.

“You asked us,” she said, “to tell you something you don't know. Well,
I will. There's a boy in the tunnel over there with a red jersey and his
leg broken.”

“What did he want to go into the blooming tunnel for, then?” said the
man.

“Don't you be so cross,” said Phyllis, kindly. “WE haven't done anything
wrong except coming and waking you up, and that was right, as it
happens.”

Then Peter told how the boy came to be in the tunnel.

“Well,” said the man, “I don't see as I can do anything. I can't leave
the box.”

“You might tell us where to go after someone who isn't in a box,
though,” said Phyllis.

“There's Brigden's farm over yonder--where you see the smoke a-coming
up through the trees,” said the man, more and more grumpy, as Phyllis
noticed.

“Well, good-bye, then,” said Peter.

But the man said, “Wait a minute.” He put his hand in his pocket and
brought out some money--a lot of pennies and one or two shillings and
sixpences and half-a-crown. He picked out two shillings and held them
out.

“Here,” he said. “I'll give you this to hold your tongues about what's
taken place to-day.”

There was a short, unpleasant pause. Then:--

“You ARE a nasty man, though, aren't you?” said Phyllis.

Peter took a step forward and knocked the man's hand up, so that the
shillings leapt out of it and rolled on the floor.

“If anything COULD make me sneak, THAT would!” he said. “Come, Phil,”
 and marched out of the signal-box with flaming cheeks.

Phyllis hesitated. Then she took the hand, still held out stupidly, that
the shillings had been in.

“I forgive you,” she said, “even if Peter doesn't. You're not in your
proper senses, or you'd never have done that. I know want of sleep sends
people mad. Mother told me. I hope your little boy will soon be better,
and--”

“Come on, Phil,” cried Peter, eagerly.

“I give you my sacred honour-word we'll never tell anyone. Kiss and be
friends,” said Phyllis, feeling how noble it was of her to try to make
up a quarrel in which she was not to blame.

The signalman stooped and kissed her.

“I do believe I'm a bit off my head, Sissy,” he said. “Now run along
home to Mother. I didn't mean to put you about--there.”

So Phil left the hot signal-box and followed Peter across the fields to
the farm.

When the farm men, led by Peter and Phyllis and carrying a hurdle
covered with horse-cloths, reached the manhole in the tunnel, Bobbie
was fast asleep and so was Jim. Worn out with the pain, the Doctor said
afterwards.

“Where does he live?” the bailiff from the farm asked, when Jim had been
lifted on to the hurdle.

“In Northumberland,” answered Bobbie.

“I'm at school at Maidbridge,” said Jim. “I suppose I've got to get back
there, somehow.”

“Seems to me the Doctor ought to have a look in first,” said the
bailiff.

“Oh, bring him up to our house,” said Bobbie. “It's only a little way by
the road. I'm sure Mother would say we ought to.”

“Will your Ma like you bringing home strangers with broken legs?”

“She took the poor Russian home herself,” said Bobbie. “I know she'd say
we ought.”

“All right,” said the bailiff, “you ought to know what your Ma 'ud like.
I wouldn't take it upon me to fetch him up to our place without I asked
the Missus first, and they call me the Master, too.”

“Are you sure your Mother won't mind?” whispered Jim.

“Certain,” said Bobbie.

“Then we're to take him up to Three Chimneys?” said the bailiff.

“Of course,” said Peter.

“Then my lad shall nip up to Doctor's on his bike, and tell him to come
down there. Now, lads, lift him quiet and steady. One, two, three!”

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Thus it happened that Mother, writing away for dear life at a story
about a Duchess, a designing villain, a secret passage, and a missing
will, dropped her pen as her work-room door burst open, and turned to
see Bobbie hatless and red with running.

“Oh, Mother,” she cried, “do come down. We found a hound in a red jersey
in the tunnel, and he's broken his leg and they're bringing him home.”

“They ought to take him to the vet,” said Mother, with a worried frown;
“I really CAN'T have a lame dog here.”

“He's not a dog, really--he's a boy,” said Bobbie, between laughing and
choking.

“Then he ought to be taken home to his mother.”

“His mother's dead,” said Bobbie, “and his father's in Northumberland.
Oh, Mother, you will be nice to him? I told him I was sure you'd want us
to bring him home. You always want to help everybody.”

Mother smiled, but she sighed, too. It is nice that your children should
believe you willing to open house and heart to any and every one who
needs help. But it is rather embarrassing sometimes, too, when they act
on their belief.

“Oh, well,” said Mother, “we must make the best of it.”

When Jim was carried in, dreadfully white and with set lips whose red
had faded to a horrid bluey violet colour, Mother said:--

“I am glad you brought him here. Now, Jim, let's get you comfortable in
bed before the Doctor comes!”

And Jim, looking at her kind eyes, felt a little, warm, comforting flush
of new courage.

“It'll hurt rather, won't it?” he said. “I don't mean to be a coward.
You won't think I'm a coward if I faint again, will you? I really
and truly don't do it on purpose. And I do hate to give you all this
trouble.”

“Don't you worry,” said Mother; “it's you that have the trouble, you
poor dear--not us.”

And she kissed him just as if he had been Peter. “We love to have you
here--don't we, Bobbie?”

“Yes,” said Bobbie--and she saw by her Mother's face how right she had
been to bring home the wounded hound in the red jersey.



Chapter XIII. The hound's grandfather.


Mother did not get back to her writing all that day, for the
red-jerseyed hound whom the children had brought to Three Chimneys had
to be put to bed. And then the Doctor came, and hurt him most horribly.
Mother was with him all through it, and that made it a little better
than it would have been, but “bad was the best,” as Mrs. Viney said.

The children sat in the parlour downstairs and heard the sound of the
Doctor's boots going backwards and forwards over the bedroom floor. And
once or twice there was a groan.

“It's horrible,” said Bobbie. “Oh, I wish Dr. Forrest would make haste.
Oh, poor Jim!”

“It IS horrible,” said Peter, “but it's very exciting. I wish Doctors
weren't so stuck-up about who they'll have in the room when they're
doing things. I should most awfully like to see a leg set. I believe the
bones crunch like anything.”

“Don't!” said the two girls at once.

“Rubbish!” said Peter. “How are you going to be Red Cross Nurses, like
you were talking of coming home, if you can't even stand hearing me say
about bones crunching? You'd have to HEAR them crunch on the field of
battle--and be steeped in gore up to the elbows as likely as not, and--”

“Stop it!” cried Bobbie, with a white face; “you don't know how funny
you're making me feel.”

“Me, too,” said Phyllis, whose face was pink.

“Cowards!” said Peter.

“I'm not,” said Bobbie. “I helped Mother with your rake-wounded foot,
and so did Phil--you know we did.”

“Well, then!” said Peter. “Now look here. It would be a jolly good thing
for you if I were to talk to you every day for half an hour about broken
bones and people's insides, so as to get you used to it.”

A chair was moved above.

“Listen,” said Peter, “that's the bone crunching.”

“I do wish you wouldn't,” said Phyllis. “Bobbie doesn't like it.”

“I'll tell you what they do,” said Peter. I can't think what made him so
horrid. Perhaps it was because he had been so very nice and kind all the
earlier part of the day, and now he had to have a change. This is called
reaction. One notices it now and then in oneself. Sometimes when one has
been extra good for a longer time than usual, one is suddenly attacked
by a violent fit of not being good at all. “I'll tell you what they do,”
 said Peter; “they strap the broken man down so that he can't resist or
interfere with their doctorish designs, and then someone holds his head,
and someone holds his leg--the broken one, and pulls it till the bones
fit in--with a crunch, mind you! Then they strap it up and--let's play
at bone-setting!”

“Oh, no!” said Phyllis.

But Bobbie said suddenly: “All right--LET'S! I'll be the doctor, and
Phil can be the nurse. You can be the broken boner; we can get at your
legs more easily, because you don't wear petticoats.”

“I'll get the splints and bandages,” said Peter; “you get the couch of
suffering ready.”

The ropes that had tied up the boxes that had come from home were all
in a wooden packing-case in the cellar. When Peter brought in a trailing
tangle of them, and two boards for splints, Phyllis was excitedly
giggling.

“Now, then,” he said, and lay down on the settle, groaning most
grievously.

“Not so loud!” said Bobbie, beginning to wind the rope round him and the
settle. “You pull, Phil.”

“Not so tight,” moaned Peter. “You'll break my other leg.”

Bobbie worked on in silence, winding more and more rope round him.

“That's enough,” said Peter. “I can't move at all. Oh, my poor leg!” He
groaned again.

“SURE you can't move?” asked Bobbie, in a rather strange tone.

“Quite sure,” replied Peter. “Shall we play it's bleeding freely or
not?” he asked cheerfully.

“YOU can play what you like,” said Bobbie, sternly, folding her arms and
looking down at him where he lay all wound round and round with cord.
“Phil and I are going away. And we shan't untie you till you promise
never, never to talk to us about blood and wounds unless we say you may.
Come, Phil!”

“You beast!” said Peter, writhing. “I'll never promise, never. I'll
yell, and Mother will come.”

“Do,” said Bobbie, “and tell her why we tied you up! Come on, Phil. No,
I'm not a beast, Peter. But you wouldn't stop when we asked you and--”

“Yah,” said Peter, “it wasn't even your own idea. You got it out of
Stalky!”

Bobbie and Phil, retiring in silent dignity, were met at the door by the
Doctor. He came in rubbing his hands and looking pleased with himself.

“Well,” he said, “THAT job's done. It's a nice clean fracture, and it'll
go on all right, I've no doubt. Plucky young chap, too--hullo! what's
all this?”

His eye had fallen on Peter who lay mousy-still in his bonds on the
settle.

“Playing at prisoners, eh?” he said; but his eyebrows had gone up a
little. Somehow he had not thought that Bobbie would be playing while in
the room above someone was having a broken bone set.

“Oh, no!” said Bobbie, “not at PRISONERS. We were playing at setting
bones. Peter's the broken boner, and I was the doctor.”

The Doctor frowned.

“Then I must say,” he said, and he said it rather sternly, “that's it's
a very heartless game. Haven't you enough imagination even to faintly
picture what's been going on upstairs? That poor chap, with the drops
of sweat on his forehead, and biting his lips so as not to cry out, and
every touch on his leg agony and--”

“YOU ought to be tied up,” said Phyllis; “you're as bad as--”

“Hush,” said Bobbie; “I'm sorry, but we weren't heartless, really.”

“I was, I suppose,” said Peter, crossly. “All right, Bobbie, don't you
go on being noble and screening me, because I jolly well won't have it.
It was only that I kept on talking about blood and wounds. I wanted to
train them for Red Cross Nurses. And I wouldn't stop when they asked
me.”

“Well?” said Dr. Forrest, sitting down.

“Well--then I said, 'Let's play at setting bones.' It was all rot. I
knew Bobbie wouldn't. I only said it to tease her. And then when she
said 'yes,' of course I had to go through with it. And they tied me up.
They got it out of Stalky. And I think it's a beastly shame.”

He managed to writhe over and hide his face against the wooden back of
the settle.

“I didn't think that anyone would know but us,” said Bobbie, indignantly
answering Peter's unspoken reproach. “I never thought of your coming in.
And hearing about blood and wounds does really make me feel most awfully
funny. It was only a joke our tying him up. Let me untie you, Pete.”

“I don't care if you never untie me,” said Peter; “and if that's your
idea of a joke--”

“If I were you,” said the Doctor, though really he did not quite know
what to say, “I should be untied before your Mother comes down. You
don't want to worry her just now, do you?”

“I don't promise anything about not saying about wounds, mind,” said
Peter, in very surly tones, as Bobbie and Phyllis began to untie the
knots.

“I'm very sorry, Pete,” Bobbie whispered, leaning close to him as she
fumbled with the big knot under the settle; “but if you only knew how
sick you made me feel.”

“You've made ME feel pretty sick, I can tell you,” Peter rejoined. Then
he shook off the loose cords, and stood up.

“I looked in,” said Dr. Forrest, “to see if one of you would come along
to the surgery. There are some things that your Mother will want at
once, and I've given my man a day off to go and see the circus; will you
come, Peter?”

Peter went without a word or a look to his sisters.

The two walked in silence up to the gate that led from the Three
Chimneys field to the road. Then Peter said:--

“Let me carry your bag. I say, it is heavy--what's in it?”

“Oh, knives and lancets and different instruments for hurting people.
And the ether bottle. I had to give him ether, you know--the agony was
so intense.”

Peter was silent.

“Tell me all about how you found that chap,” said Dr. Forrest.

Peter told. And then Dr. Forrest told him stories of brave rescues; he
was a most interesting man to talk to, as Peter had often remarked.

Then in the surgery Peter had a better chance than he had ever had of
examining the Doctor's balance, and his microscope, and his scales and
measuring glasses. When all the things were ready that Peter was to take
back, the Doctor said suddenly:--

“You'll excuse my shoving my oar in, won't you? But I should like to say
something to you.”

“Now for a rowing,” thought Peter, who had been wondering how it was
that he had escaped one.

“Something scientific,” added the Doctor.

“Yes,” said Peter, fiddling with the fossil ammonite that the Doctor
used for a paper-weight.

“Well then, you see. Boys and girls are only little men and women. And
WE are much harder and hardier than they are--” (Peter liked the “we.”
 Perhaps the Doctor had known he would.)--“and much stronger, and things
that hurt THEM don't hurt US. You know you mustn't hit a girl--”

“I should think not, indeed,” muttered Peter, indignantly.

“Not even if she's your own sister. That's because girls are so much
softer and weaker than we are; they have to be, you know,” he added,
“because if they weren't, it wouldn't be nice for the babies. And that's
why all the animals are so good to the mother animals. They never fight
them, you know.”

“I know,” said Peter, interested; “two buck rabbits will fight all day
if you let them, but they won't hurt a doe.”

“No; and quite wild beasts--lions and elephants--they're immensely
gentle with the female beasts. And we've got to be, too.”

“I see,” said Peter.

“And their hearts are soft, too,” the Doctor went on, “and things that
we shouldn't think anything of hurt them dreadfully. So that a man has
to be very careful, not only of his fists, but of his words. They're
awfully brave, you know,” he went on. “Think of Bobbie waiting alone in
the tunnel with that poor chap. It's an odd thing--the softer and more
easily hurt a woman is the better she can screw herself up to do what
HAS to be done. I've seen some brave women--your Mother's one,” he ended
abruptly.

“Yes,” said Peter.

“Well, that's all. Excuse my mentioning it. But nobody knows everything
without being told. And you see what I mean, don't you?”

“Yes,” said Peter. “I'm sorry. There!”

“Of course you are! People always are--directly they understand.
Everyone ought to be taught these scientific facts. So long!”

They shook hands heartily. When Peter came home, his sisters looked at
him doubtfully.

“It's Pax,” said Peter, dumping down the basket on the table. “Dr.
Forrest has been talking scientific to me. No, it's no use my telling
you what he said; you wouldn't understand. But it all comes to you girls
being poor, soft, weak, frightened things like rabbits, so us men have
just got to put up with them. He said you were female beasts. Shall I
take this up to Mother, or will you?”

“I know what BOYS are,” said Phyllis, with flaming cheeks; “they're just
the nastiest, rudest--”

“They're very brave,” said Bobbie, “sometimes.”

“Ah, you mean the chap upstairs? I see. Go ahead, Phil--I shall put
up with you whatever you say because you're a poor, weak, frightened,
soft--”

“Not if I pull your hair you won't,” said Phyllis, springing at him.

“He said 'Pax,'” said Bobbie, pulling her away. “Don't you see,” she
whispered as Peter picked up the basket and stalked out with it, “he's
sorry, really, only he won't say so? Let's say we're sorry.”

“It's so goody goody,” said Phyllis, doubtfully; “he said we were female
beasts, and soft and frightened--”

“Then let's show him we're not frightened of him thinking us goody
goody,” said Bobbie; “and we're not any more beasts than he is.”

And when Peter came back, still with his chin in the air, Bobbie said:--

“We're sorry we tied you up, Pete.”

“I thought you would be,” said Peter, very stiff and superior.

This was hard to bear. But--

“Well, so we are,” said Bobbie. “Now let honour be satisfied on both
sides.”

“I did call it Pax,” said Peter, in an injured tone.

“Then let it BE Pax,” said Bobbie. “Come on, Phil, let's get the tea.
Pete, you might lay the cloth.”

“I say,” said Phyllis, when peace was really restored, which was not
till they were washing up the cups after tea, “Dr. Forrest didn't REALLY
say we were female beasts, did he?”

“Yes,” said Peter, firmly, “but I think he meant we men were wild
beasts, too.”

“How funny of him!” said Phyllis, breaking a cup.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

“May I come in, Mother?” Peter was at the door of Mother's writing room,
where Mother sat at her table with two candles in front of her. Their
flames looked orange and violet against the clear grey blue of the sky
where already a few stars were twinkling.

“Yes, dear,” said Mother, absently, “anything wrong?” She wrote a few
more words and then laid down her pen and began to fold up what she had
written. “I was just writing to Jim's grandfather. He lives near here,
you know.”

“Yes, you said so at tea. That's what I want to say. Must you write to
him, Mother? Couldn't we keep Jim, and not say anything to his people
till he's well? It would be such a surprise for them.”

“Well, yes,” said Mother, laughing, “I think it would.”

“You see,” Peter went on, “of course the girls are all right and all
that--I'm not saying anything against THEM. But I should like it if I
had another chap to talk to sometimes.”

“Yes,” said Mother, “I know it's dull for you, dear. But I can't
help it. Next year perhaps I can send you to school--you'd like that,
wouldn't you?”

“I do miss the other chaps, rather,” Peter confessed; “but if Jim could
stay after his leg was well, we could have awful larks.”

“I've no doubt of it,” said Mother. “Well--perhaps he could, but you
know, dear, we're not rich. I can't afford to get him everything he'll
want. And he must have a nurse.”

“Can't you nurse him, Mother? You do nurse people so beautifully.”

“That's a pretty compliment, Pete--but I can't do nursing and my writing
as well. That's the worst of it.”

“Then you MUST send the letter to his grandfather?”

“Of course--and to his schoolmaster, too. We telegraphed to them both,
but I must write as well. They'll be most dreadfully anxious.”

“I say, Mother, why can't his grandfather pay for a nurse?” Peter
suggested. “That would be ripping. I expect the old boy's rolling in
money. Grandfathers in books always are.”

“Well, this one isn't in a book,” said Mother, “so we mustn't expect him
to roll much.”

“I say,” said Peter, musingly, “wouldn't it be jolly if we all WERE in
a book, and you were writing it? Then you could make all sorts of jolly
things happen, and make Jim's legs get well at once and be all right
to-morrow, and Father come home soon and--”

“Do you miss your Father very much?” Mother asked, rather coldly, Peter
thought.

“Awfully,” said Peter, briefly.

Mother was enveloping and addressing the second letter.

“You see,” Peter went on slowly, “you see, it's not only him BEING
Father, but now he's away there's no other man in the house but
me--that's why I want Jim to stay so frightfully much. Wouldn't you like
to be writing that book with us all in it, Mother, and make Daddy come
home soon?”

Peter's Mother put her arm round him suddenly, and hugged him in silence
for a minute. Then she said:--

“Don't you think it's rather nice to think that we're in a book that
God's writing? If I were writing the book, I might make mistakes. But
God knows how to make the story end just right--in the way that's best
for us.”

“Do you really believe that, Mother?” Peter asked quietly.

“Yes,” she said, “I do believe it--almost always--except when I'm so sad
that I can't believe anything. But even when I can't believe it, I know
it's true--and I try to believe. You don't know how I try, Peter. Now
take the letters to the post, and don't let's be sad any more. Courage,
courage! That's the finest of all the virtues! I dare say Jim will be
here for two or three weeks yet.”

For what was left of the evening Peter was so angelic that Bobbie feared
he was going to be ill. She was quite relieved in the morning to find
him plaiting Phyllis's hair on to the back of her chair in quite his old
manner.

It was soon after breakfast that a knock came at the door. The children
were hard at work cleaning the brass candlesticks in honour of Jim's
visit.

“That'll be the Doctor,” said Mother; “I'll go. Shut the kitchen
door--you're not fit to be seen.”

But it wasn't the Doctor. They knew that by the voice and by the sound
of the boots that went upstairs. They did not recognise the sound of the
boots, but everyone was certain that they had heard the voice before.

There was a longish interval. The boots and the voice did not come down
again.

“Who can it possibly be?” they kept on asking themselves and each other.

“Perhaps,” said Peter at last, “Dr. Forrest has been attacked by
highwaymen and left for dead, and this is the man he's telegraphed for
to take his place. Mrs. Viney said he had a local tenant to do his work
when he went for a holiday, didn't you, Mrs. Viney?”

“I did so, my dear,” said Mrs. Viney from the back kitchen.

“He's fallen down in a fit, more likely,” said Phyllis, “all human aid
despaired of. And this is his man come to break the news to Mother.”

“Nonsense!” said Peter, briskly; “Mother wouldn't have taken the man
up into Jim's bedroom. Why should she? Listen--the door's opening. Now
they'll come down. I'll open the door a crack.”

He did.

“It's not listening,” he replied indignantly to Bobbie's scandalised
remarks; “nobody in their senses would talk secrets on the stairs. And
Mother can't have secrets to talk with Dr. Forrest's stable-man--and you
said it was him.”

“Bobbie,” called Mother's voice.

They opened the kitchen door, and Mother leaned over the stair railing.

“Jim's grandfather has come,” she said; “wash your hands and faces and
then you can see him. He wants to see you!” The bedroom door shut again.

“There now!” said Peter; “fancy us not even thinking of that! Let's have
some hot water, Mrs. Viney. I'm as black as your hat.”

The three were indeed dirty, for the stuff you clean brass candlesticks
with is very far from cleaning to the cleaner.

They were still busy with soap and flannel when they heard the boots
and the voice come down the stairs and go into the dining-room. And when
they were clean, though still damp--because it takes such a long time
to dry your hands properly, and they were very impatient to see the
grandfather--they filed into the dining-room.

Mother was sitting in the window-seat, and in the leather-covered
armchair that Father always used to sit in at the other house sat--

     THEIR OWN OLD GENTLEMAN!

“Well, I never did,” said Peter, even before he said, “How do you do?”
 He was, as he explained afterwards, too surprised even to remember that
there was such a thing as politeness--much less to practise it.

“It's our own old gentleman!” said Phyllis.

“Oh, it's you!” said Bobbie. And then they remembered themselves and
their manners and said, “How do you do?” very nicely.

“This is Jim's grandfather, Mr. ----” said Mother, naming the old
gentleman's name.

“How splendid!” said Peter; “that's just exactly like a book, isn't it,
Mother?”

“It is, rather,” said Mother, smiling; “things do happen in real life
that are rather like books, sometimes.”

“I am so awfully glad it IS you,” said Phyllis; “when you think of the
tons of old gentlemen there are in the world--it might have been almost
anyone.”

“I say, though,” said Peter, “you're not going to take Jim away, though,
are you?”

“Not at present,” said the old gentleman. “Your Mother has most kindly
consented to let him stay here. I thought of sending a nurse, but your
Mother is good enough to say that she will nurse him herself.”

“But what about her writing?” said Peter, before anyone could stop him.
“There won't be anything for him to eat if Mother doesn't write.”

“That's all right,” said Mother, hastily.

The old gentleman looked very kindly at Mother.

“I see,” he said, “you trust your children, and confide in them.”

“Of course,” said Mother.

“Then I may tell them of our little arrangement,” he said. “Your Mother,
my dears, has consented to give up writing for a little while and to
become a Matron of my Hospital.”

“Oh!” said Phyllis, blankly; “and shall we have to go away from Three
Chimneys and the Railway and everything?”

“No, no, darling,” said Mother, hurriedly.

“The Hospital is called Three Chimneys Hospital,” said the old
gentleman, “and my unlucky Jim's the only patient, and I hope he'll
continue to be so. Your Mother will be Matron, and there'll be a
hospital staff of a housemaid and a cook--till Jim's well.”

“And then will Mother go on writing again?” asked Peter.

“We shall see,” said the old gentleman, with a slight, swift glance at
Bobbie; “perhaps something nice may happen and she won't have to.”

“I love my writing,” said Mother, very quickly.

“I know,” said the old gentleman; “don't be afraid that I'm going to try
to interfere. But one never knows. Very wonderful and beautiful things
do happen, don't they? And we live most of our lives in the hope of
them. I may come again to see the boy?”

“Surely,” said Mother, “and I don't know how to thank you for making it
possible for me to nurse him. Dear boy!”

“He kept calling Mother, Mother, in the night,” said Phyllis. “I woke up
twice and heard him.”

“He didn't mean me,” said Mother, in a low voice to the old gentleman;
“that's why I wanted so much to keep him.”

The old gentleman rose.

“I'm so glad,” said Peter, “that you're going to keep him, Mother.”

“Take care of your Mother, my dears,” said the old gentleman. “She's a
woman in a million.”

“Yes, isn't she?” whispered Bobbie.

“God bless her,” said the old gentleman, taking both Mother's hands,
“God bless her! Ay, and she shall be blessed. Dear me, where's my hat?
Will Bobbie come with me to the gate?”

At the gate he stopped and said:--

“You're a good child, my dear--I got your letter. But it wasn't needed.
When I read about your Father's case in the papers at the time, I had my
doubts. And ever since I've known who you were, I've been trying to find
out things. I haven't done very much yet. But I have hopes, my dear--I
have hopes.”

“Oh!” said Bobbie, choking a little.

“Yes--I may say great hopes. But keep your secret a little longer.
Wouldn't do to upset your Mother with a false hope, would it?”

“Oh, but it isn't false!” said Bobbie; “I KNOW you can do it. I knew you
could when I wrote. It isn't a false hope, is it?”

“No,” he said, “I don't think it's a false hope, or I wouldn't have told
you. And I think you deserve to be told that there IS a hope.”

“And you don't think Father did it, do you? Oh, say you don't think he
did.”

“My dear,” he said, “I'm perfectly CERTAIN he didn't.”

If it was a false hope, it was none the less a very radiant one that lay
warm at Bobbie's heart, and through the days that followed lighted her
little face as a Japanese lantern is lighted by the candle within.



Chapter XIV. The End.


Life at the Three Chimneys was never quite the same again after the old
gentleman came to see his grandson. Although they now knew his name,
the children never spoke of him by it--at any rate, when they were by
themselves. To them he was always the old gentleman, and I think he had
better be the old gentleman to us, too. It wouldn't make him seem any
more real to you, would it, if I were to tell you that his name was
Snooks or Jenkins (which it wasn't)?--and, after all, I must be allowed
to keep one secret. It's the only one; I have told you everything else,
except what I am going to tell you in this chapter, which is the last.
At least, of course, I haven't told you EVERYTHING. If I were to do
that, the book would never come to an end, and that would be a pity,
wouldn't it?

Well, as I was saying, life at Three Chimneys was never quite the same
again. The cook and the housemaid were very nice (I don't mind telling
you their names--they were Clara and Ethelwyn), but they told Mother
they did not seem to want Mrs. Viney, and that she was an old muddler.
So Mrs. Viney came only two days a week to do washing and ironing. Then
Clara and Ethelwyn said they could do the work all right if they weren't
interfered with, and that meant that the children no longer got the tea
and cleared it away and washed up the tea-things and dusted the rooms.

This would have left quite a blank in their lives, although they
had often pretended to themselves and to each other that they hated
housework. But now that Mother had no writing and no housework to do,
she had time for lessons. And lessons the children had to do. However
nice the person who is teaching you may be, lessons are lessons all the
world over, and at their best are worse fun than peeling potatoes or
lighting a fire.

On the other hand, if Mother now had time for lessons, she also had time
for play, and to make up little rhymes for the children as she used
to do. She had not had much time for rhymes since she came to Three
Chimneys.

There was one very odd thing about these lessons. Whatever the children
were doing, they always wanted to be doing something else. When Peter
was doing his Latin, he thought it would be nice to be learning History
like Bobbie. Bobbie would have preferred Arithmetic, which was what
Phyllis happened to be doing, and Phyllis of course thought Latin much
the most interesting kind of lesson. And so on.

So, one day, when they sat down to lessons, each of them found a little
rhyme at its place. I put the rhymes in to show you that their Mother
really did understand a little how children feel about things, and also
the kind of words they use, which is the case with very few grown-up
people. I suppose most grown-ups have very bad memories, and have
forgotten how they felt when they were little. Of course, the verses are
supposed to be spoken by the children.

               PETER

     I once thought Caesar easy pap--
       How very soft I must have been!
     When they start Caesar with a chap
       He little know what that will mean.
     Oh, verbs are silly stupid things.
     I'd rather learn the dates of kings!

               BOBBIE

     The worst of all my lesson things
       Is learning who succeeded who
     In all the rows of queens and kings,
       With dates to everything they do:
     With dates enough to make you sick;--
     I wish it was Arithmetic!

               PHYLLIS

     Such pounds and pounds of apples fill
       My slate--what is the price you'd spend?
     You scratch the figures out until
       You cry upon the dividend.
     I'd break the slate and scream for joy
     If I did Latin like a boy!

This kind of thing, of course, made lessons much jollier. It is
something to know that the person who is teaching you sees that it is
not all plain sailing for you, and does not think that it is just your
stupidness that makes you not know your lessons till you've learned
them!

Then as Jim's leg got better it was very pleasant to go up and sit with
him and hear tales about his school life and the other boys. There
was one boy, named Parr, of whom Jim seemed to have formed the lowest
possible opinion, and another boy named Wigsby Minor, for whose views
Jim had a great respect. Also there were three brothers named Paley, and
the youngest was called Paley Terts, and was much given to fighting.

Peter drank in all this with deep joy, and Mother seemed to have
listened with some interest, for one day she gave Jim a sheet of paper
on which she had written a rhyme about Parr, bringing in Paley and
Wigsby by name in a most wonderful way, as well as all the reasons Jim
had for not liking Parr, and Wigsby's wise opinion on the matter. Jim
was immensely pleased. He had never had a rhyme written expressly for
him before. He read it till he knew it by heart and then he sent it to
Wigsby, who liked it almost as much as Jim did. Perhaps you may like it,
too.

               THE NEW BOY

     His name is Parr:  he says that he
     Is given bread and milk for tea.
     He says his father killed a bear.
     He says his mother cuts his hair.

     He wears goloshes when it's wet.
     I've heard his people call him “Pet”!
     He has no proper sense of shame;
     He told the chaps his Christian name.

     He cannot wicket-keep at all,
     He's frightened of a cricket ball.
     He reads indoors for hours and hours.
     He knows the names of beastly flowers.

     He says his French just like Mossoo--
     A beastly stuck-up thing to do--
     He won't keep _cave_, shirks his turn
     And says he came to school to learn!

     He won't play football, says it hurts;
     He wouldn't fight with Paley Terts;
     He couldn't whistle if he tried,
     And when we laughed at him he cried!

     Now Wigsby Minor says that Parr
     Is only like all new boys are.
     I know when _I_ first came to school
     I wasn't such a jolly fool!

Jim could never understand how Mother could have been clever enough
to do it. To the others it seemed nice, but natural. You see they had
always been used to having a mother who could write verses just like
the way people talk, even to the shocking expression at the end of the
rhyme, which was Jim's very own.

Jim taught Peter to play chess and draughts and dominoes, and altogether
it was a nice quiet time.

Only Jim's leg got better and better, and a general feeling began to
spring up among Bobbie, Peter, and Phyllis that something ought to be
done to amuse him; not just games, but something really handsome. But it
was extraordinarily difficult to think of anything.

“It's no good,” said Peter, when all of them had thought and thought
till their heads felt quite heavy and swollen; “if we can't think of
anything to amuse him, we just can't, and there's an end of it. Perhaps
something will just happen of its own accord that he'll like.”

“Things DO happen by themselves sometimes, without your making them,”
 said Phyllis, rather as though, usually, everything that happened in the
world was her doing.

“I wish something would happen,” said Bobbie, dreamily, “something
wonderful.”

And something wonderful did happen exactly four days after she had said
this. I wish I could say it was three days after, because in fairy tales
it is always three days after that things happen. But this is not a
fairy story, and besides, it really was four and not three, and I am
nothing if not strictly truthful.

They seemed to be hardly Railway children at all in those days, and as
the days went on each had an uneasy feeling about this which Phyllis
expressed one day.

“I wonder if the Railway misses us,” she said, plaintively. “We never go
to see it now.”

“It seems ungrateful,” said Bobbie; “we loved it so when we hadn't
anyone else to play with.”

“Perks is always coming up to ask after Jim,” said Peter, “and the
signalman's little boy is better. He told me so.”

“I didn't mean the people,” explained Phyllis; “I meant the dear Railway
itself.”

“The thing I don't like,” said Bobbie, on this fourth day, which was a
Tuesday, “is our having stopped waving to the 9.15 and sending our love
to Father by it.”

“Let's begin again,” said Phyllis. And they did.

Somehow the change of everything that was made by having servants in
the house and Mother not doing any writing, made the time seem extremely
long since that strange morning at the beginning of things, when they
had got up so early and burnt the bottom out of the kettle and had apple
pie for breakfast and first seen the Railway.

It was September now, and the turf on the slope to the Railway was dry
and crisp. Little long grass spikes stood up like bits of gold wire,
frail blue harebells trembled on their tough, slender stalks, Gipsy
roses opened wide and flat their lilac-coloured discs, and the golden
stars of St. John's Wort shone at the edges of the pool that lay halfway
to the Railway. Bobbie gathered a generous handful of the flowers and
thought how pretty they would look lying on the green-and-pink blanket
of silk-waste that now covered Jim's poor broken leg.

“Hurry up,” said Peter, “or we shall miss the 9.15!”

“I can't hurry more than I am doing,” said Phyllis. “Oh, bother it! My
bootlace has come undone AGAIN!”

“When you're married,” said Peter, “your bootlace will come undone going
up the church aisle, and your man that you're going to get married to
will tumble over it and smash his nose in on the ornamented pavement;
and then you'll say you won't marry him, and you'll have to be an old
maid.”

“I shan't,” said Phyllis. “I'd much rather marry a man with his nose
smashed in than not marry anybody.”

“It would be horrid to marry a man with a smashed nose, all the same,”
 went on Bobbie. “He wouldn't be able to smell the flowers at the
wedding. Wouldn't that be awful!”

“Bother the flowers at the wedding!” cried Peter. “Look! the signal's
down. We must run!”

They ran. And once more they waved their handkerchiefs, without at all
minding whether the handkerchiefs were clean or not, to the 9.15.

“Take our love to Father!” cried Bobbie. And the others, too, shouted:--

“Take our love to Father!”

The old gentleman waved from his first-class carriage window. Quite
violently he waved. And there was nothing odd in that, for he always
had waved. But what was really remarkable was that from every window
handkerchiefs fluttered, newspapers signalled, hands waved wildly. The
train swept by with a rustle and roar, the little pebbles jumped and
danced under it as it passed, and the children were left looking at each
other.

“Well!” said Peter.

“WELL!” said Bobbie.

“_WELL!_” said Phyllis.

“Whatever on earth does that mean?” asked Peter, but he did not expect
any answer.

“_I_ don't know,” said Bobbie. “Perhaps the old gentleman told the
people at his station to look out for us and wave. He knew we should
like it!”

Now, curiously enough, this was just what had happened. The old
gentleman, who was very well known and respected at his particular
station, had got there early that morning, and he had waited at the door
where the young man stands holding the interesting machine that clips
the tickets, and he had said something to every single passenger who
passed through that door. And after nodding to what the old gentleman
had said--and the nods expressed every shade of surprise, interest,
doubt, cheerful pleasure, and grumpy agreement--each passenger had gone
on to the platform and read one certain part of his newspaper. And when
the passengers got into the train, they had told the other passengers
who were already there what the old gentleman had said, and then the
other passengers had also looked at their newspapers and seemed very
astonished and, mostly, pleased. Then, when the train passed the fence
where the three children were, newspapers and hands and handkerchiefs
were waved madly, till all that side of the train was fluttery with
white like the pictures of the King's Coronation in the biograph at
Maskelyne and Cook's. To the children it almost seemed as though the
train itself was alive, and was at last responding to the love that they
had given it so freely and so long.

“It is most extraordinarily rum!” said Peter.

“Most stronery!” echoed Phyllis.

But Bobbie said, “Don't you think the old gentleman's waves seemed more
significating than usual?”

“No,” said the others.

“I do,” said Bobbie. “I thought he was trying to explain something to us
with his newspaper.”

“Explain what?” asked Peter, not unnaturally.

“_I_ don't know,” Bobbie answered, “but I do feel most awfully funny. I
feel just exactly as if something was going to happen.”

“What is going to happen,” said Peter, “is that Phyllis's stocking is
going to come down.”

This was but too true. The suspender had given way in the agitation of
the waves to the 9.15. Bobbie's handkerchief served as first aid to the
injured, and they all went home.

Lessons were more than usually difficult to Bobbie that day. Indeed, she
disgraced herself so deeply over a quite simple sum about the division
of 48 pounds of meat and 36 pounds of bread among 144 hungry children
that Mother looked at her anxiously.

“Don't you feel quite well, dear?” she asked.

“I don't know,” was Bobbie's unexpected answer. “I don't know how
I feel. It isn't that I'm lazy. Mother, will you let me off lessons
to-day? I feel as if I wanted to be quite alone by myself.”

“Yes, of course I'll let you off,” said Mother; “but--”

Bobbie dropped her slate. It cracked just across the little green mark
that is so useful for drawing patterns round, and it was never the same
slate again. Without waiting to pick it up she bolted. Mother caught her
in the hall feeling blindly among the waterproofs and umbrellas for her
garden hat.

“What is it, my sweetheart?” said Mother. “You don't feel ill, do you?”

“I DON'T know,” Bobbie answered, a little breathlessly, “but I want to
be by myself and see if my head really IS all silly and my inside all
squirmy-twisty.”

“Hadn't you better lie down?” Mother said, stroking her hair back from
her forehead.

“I'd be more alive in the garden, I think,” said Bobbie.

But she could not stay in the garden. The hollyhocks and the asters and
the late roses all seemed to be waiting for something to happen. It was
one of those still, shiny autumn days, when everything does seem to be
waiting.

Bobbie could not wait.

“I'll go down to the station,” she said, “and talk to Perks and ask
about the signalman's little boy.”

So she went down. On the way she passed the old lady from the
Post-office, who gave her a kiss and a hug, but, rather to Bobbie's
surprise, no words except:--

“God bless you, love--” and, after a pause, “run along--do.”

The draper's boy, who had sometimes been a little less than civil and
a little more than contemptuous, now touched his cap, and uttered the
remarkable words:--

“'Morning, Miss, I'm sure--”

The blacksmith, coming along with an open newspaper in his hand, was
even more strange in his manner. He grinned broadly, though, as a rule,
he was a man not given to smiles, and waved the newspaper long before
he came up to her. And as he passed her, he said, in answer to her “Good
morning”:--

“Good morning to you, Missie, and many of them! I wish you joy, that I
do!”

“Oh!” said Bobbie to herself, and her heart quickened its beats,
“something IS going to happen! I know it is--everyone is so odd, like
people are in dreams.”

The Station Master wrung her hand warmly. In fact he worked it up and
down like a pump-handle. But he gave her no reason for this unusually
enthusiastic greeting. He only said:--

“The 11.54's a bit late, Miss--the extra luggage this holiday time,”
 and went away very quickly into that inner Temple of his into which even
Bobbie dared not follow him.

Perks was not to be seen, and Bobbie shared the solitude of the platform
with the Station Cat. This tortoiseshell lady, usually of a retiring
disposition, came to-day to rub herself against the brown stockings of
Bobbie with arched back, waving tail, and reverberating purrs.

“Dear me!” said Bobbie, stooping to stroke her, “how very kind everybody
is to-day--even you, Pussy!”

Perks did not appear until the 11.54 was signalled, and then he, like
everybody else that morning, had a newspaper in his hand.

“Hullo!” he said, “'ere you are. Well, if THIS is the train, it'll be
smart work! Well, God bless you, my dear! I see it in the paper, and
I don't think I was ever so glad of anything in all my born days!” He
looked at Bobbie a moment, then said, “One I must have, Miss, and no
offence, I know, on a day like this 'ere!” and with that he kissed her,
first on one cheek and then on the other.

“You ain't offended, are you?” he asked anxiously. “I ain't took too
great a liberty? On a day like this, you know--”

“No, no,” said Bobbie, “of course it's not a liberty, dear Mr. Perks;
we love you quite as much as if you were an uncle of ours--but--on a day
like WHAT?”

“Like this 'ere!” said Perks. “Don't I tell you I see it in the paper?”

“Saw WHAT in the paper?” asked Bobbie, but already the 11.54 was
steaming into the station and the Station Master was looking at all the
places where Perks was not and ought to have been.

Bobbie was left standing alone, the Station Cat watching her from under
the bench with friendly golden eyes.

Of course you know already exactly what was going to happen. Bobbie was
not so clever. She had the vague, confused, expectant feeling that comes
to one's heart in dreams. What her heart expected I can't tell--perhaps
the very thing that you and I know was going to happen--but her mind
expected nothing; it was almost blank, and felt nothing but tiredness
and stupidness and an empty feeling, like your body has when you have
been a long walk and it is very far indeed past your proper dinner-time.

Only three people got out of the 11.54. The first was a countryman with
two baskety boxes full of live chickens who stuck their russet heads
out anxiously through the wicker bars; the second was Miss Peckitt, the
grocer's wife's cousin, with a tin box and three brown-paper parcels;
and the third--

“Oh! my Daddy, my Daddy!” That scream went like a knife into the heart
of everyone in the train, and people put their heads out of the windows
to see a tall pale man with lips set in a thin close line, and a little
girl clinging to him with arms and legs, while his arms went tightly
round her.

         *          *          *          *          *          *

“I knew something wonderful was going to happen,” said Bobbie, as they
went up the road, “but I didn't think it was going to be this. Oh, my
Daddy, my Daddy!”

“Then didn't Mother get my letter?” Father asked.

“There weren't any letters this morning. Oh! Daddy! it IS really you,
isn't it?”

The clasp of a hand she had not forgotten assured her that it was. “You
must go in by yourself, Bobbie, and tell Mother quite quietly that it's
all right. They've caught the man who did it. Everyone knows now that it
wasn't your Daddy.”

“_I_ always knew it wasn't,” said Bobbie. “Me and Mother and our old
gentleman.”

“Yes,” he said, “it's all his doing. Mother wrote and told me you had
found out. And she told me what you'd been to her. My own little girl!”
 They stopped a minute then.

And now I see them crossing the field. Bobbie goes into the house,
trying to keep her eyes from speaking before her lips have found the
right words to “tell Mother quite quietly” that the sorrow and the
struggle and the parting are over and done, and that Father has come
home.

I see Father walking in the garden, waiting--waiting. He is looking at
the flowers, and each flower is a miracle to eyes that all these months
of Spring and Summer have seen only flagstones and gravel and a little
grudging grass. But his eyes keep turning towards the house. And
presently he leaves the garden and goes to stand outside the nearest
door. It is the back door, and across the yard the swallows are
circling. They are getting ready to fly away from cold winds and keen
frost to the land where it is always summer. They are the same swallows
that the children built the little clay nests for.

Now the house door opens. Bobbie's voice calls:--

“Come in, Daddy; come in!”

He goes in and the door is shut. I think we will not open the door or
follow him. I think that just now we are not wanted there. I think it
will be best for us to go quickly and quietly away. At the end of the
field, among the thin gold spikes of grass and the harebells and Gipsy
roses and St. John's Wort, we may just take one last look, over our
shoulders, at the white house where neither we nor anyone else is wanted
now.

CHAPTER I

BEAUTIFUL AS THE DAY


The house was three miles from the station, but, before the dusty hired
hack had rattled along for five minutes, the children began to put their
heads out of the carriage window and say, "Aren't we nearly there?" And
every time they passed a house, which was not very often, they all said,
"Oh, _is_ this it?" But it never was, till they reached the very top of
the hill, just past the chalk-quarry and before you come to the
gravel-pit. And then there was a white house with a green garden and an
orchard beyond, and mother said, "Here we are!"

"How white the house is," said Robert.

"And look at the roses," said Anthea.

"And the plums," said Jane.

"It is rather decent," Cyril admitted.

The Baby said, "Wanty go walky;" and the hack stopped with a last rattle
and jolt.

Everyone got its legs kicked or its feet trodden on in the scramble to
get out of the carriage that very minute, but no one seemed to mind.
Mother, curiously enough, was in no hurry to get out; and even when she
had come down slowly and by the step, and with no jump at all, she
seemed to wish to see the boxes carried in, and even to pay the driver,
instead of joining in that first glorious rush round the garden and
orchard and the thorny, thistly, briery, brambly wilderness beyond the
broken gate and the dry fountain at the side of the house. But the
children were wiser, for once. It was not really a pretty house at all;
it was quite ordinary, and mother thought it was rather inconvenient,
and was quite annoyed at there being no shelves, to speak of, and hardly
a cupboard in the place. Father used to say that the iron-work on the
roof and coping was like an architect's nightmare. But the house was
deep in the country, with no other house in sight, and the children had
been in London for two years, without so much as once going to the
seaside even for a day by an excursion train, and so the White House
seemed to them a sort of Fairy Palace set down in an Earthly Paradise.
For London is like prison for children, especially if their relations
are not rich.

[Illustration: That first glorious rush round the garden]

Of course there are the shops and theatres, and entertainments and
things, but if your people are rather poor you don't get taken to the
theatres, and you can't buy things out of the shops; and London has none
of those nice things that children may play with without hurting the
things or themselves--such as trees and sand and woods and waters. And
nearly everything in London is the wrong sort of shape--all straight
lines and flat streets, instead of being all sorts of odd shapes, like
things are in the country. Trees are all different, as you know, and I
am sure some tiresome person must have told you that there are no two
blades of grass exactly alike. But in streets, where the blades of grass
don't grow, everything is like everything else. This is why many
children who live in the towns are so extremely naughty. They do not
know what is the matter with them, and no more do their fathers and
mothers, aunts, uncles, cousins, tutors, governesses, and nurses; but I
know. And so do you, now. Children in the country are naughty sometimes,
too, but that is for quite different reasons.

The children had explored the gardens and the outhouses thoroughly
before they were caught and cleaned for tea, and they saw quite well
that they were certain to be happy at the White House. They thought so
from the first moment, but when they found the back of the house covered
with jasmine, all in white flower, and smelling like a bottle of the
most expensive perfume that is ever given for a birthday present; and
when they had seen the lawn, all green and smooth, and quite different
from the brown grass in the gardens at Camden Town; and when they found
the stable with a loft over it and some old hay still left, they were
almost certain; and when Robert had found the broken swing and tumbled
out of it and got a bump on his head the size of an egg, and Cyril had
nipped his finger in the door of a hutch that seemed made to keep
rabbits in, if you ever had any, they had no longer any doubts
whatever.

[Illustration: Cyril had nipped his finger in the door of a hutch]

The best part of it all was that there were no rules about not going to
places and not doing things. In London almost everything is labelled
"You mustn't touch," and though the label is invisible it's just as bad,
because you know it's there, or if you don't you very soon get told.

The White House was on the edge of a hill, with a wood behind it--and
the chalk-quarry on one side and the gravel-pit on the other. Down at
the bottom of the hill was a level plain, with queer-shaped white
buildings where people burnt lime, and a big red brewery and other
houses; and when the big chimneys were smoking and the sun was setting,
the valley looked as if it was filled with golden mist, and the
limekilns and hop-drying houses glimmered and glittered till they were
like an enchanted city out of the _Arabian Nights_.

Now that I have begun to tell you about the place, I feel that I could
go on and make this into a most interesting story about all the
ordinary things that the children did,--just the kind of things you do
yourself, you know, and you would believe every word of it; and when I
told about the children's being tiresome, as you are sometimes, your
aunts would perhaps write in the margin of the story with a pencil, "How
true!" or "How like life!" and you would see it and would very likely be
annoyed. So I will only tell you the really astonishing things that
happened, and you may leave the book about quite safely, for no aunts
and uncles either are likely to write "How true!" on the edge of the
story. Grown-up people find it very difficult to believe really
wonderful things, unless they have what they call proof. But children
will believe almost anything, and grown-ups know this. That is why they
tell you that the earth is round like an orange, when you can see
perfectly well that it is flat and lumpy; and why they say that the
earth goes round the sun, when you can see for yourself any day that the
sun gets up in the morning and goes to bed at night like a good sun as
it is, and the earth knows its place, and lies as still as a mouse. Yet
I daresay you believe all that about the earth and the sun, and if so
you will find it quite easy to believe that before Anthea and Cyril and
the others had been a week in the country they had found a fairy. At
least they called it that, because that was what it called itself; and
of course it knew best, but it was not at all like any fairy you ever
saw or heard of or read about.

It was at the gravel-pits. Father had to go away suddenly on business,
and mother had gone away to stay with Granny, who was not very well.
They both went in a great hurry, and when they were gone the house
seemed dreadfully quiet and empty, and the children wandered from one
room to another and looked at the bits of paper and string on the floors
left over from the packing, and not yet cleared up, and wished they had
something to do. It was Cyril who said--

"I say, let's take our spades and dig in the gravel-pits. We can pretend
it's seaside."

"Father says it was once," Anthea said; "he says there are shells there
thousands of years old."

So they went. Of course they had been to the edge of the gravel-pit and
looked over, but they had not gone down into it for fear father should
say they mustn't play there, and it was the same with the chalk-quarry.
The gravel-pit is not really dangerous if you don't try to climb down
the edges, but go the slow safe way round by the road, as if you were a
cart.

Each of the children carried its own spade, and took it in turns to
carry the Lamb. He was the baby, and they called him that because "Baa"
was the first thing he ever said. They called Anthea "Panther," which
seems silly when you read it, but when you say it it sounds a little
like her name.

The gravel-pit is very large and wide, with grass growing round the
edges at the top, and dry stringy wildflowers, purple and yellow. It is
like a giant's washbowl. And there are mounds of gravel, and holes in
the sides of the bowl where gravel has been taken out, and high up in
the steep sides there are the little holes that are the little front
doors of the little bank-martins' little houses.

The children built a castle, of course, but castle-building is rather
poor fun when you have no hope of the swishing tide ever coming in to
fill up the moat and wash away the drawbridge, and, at the happy last,
to wet everybody up to the waist at least.

Cyril wanted to dig out a cave to play smugglers in, but the others
thought it might bury them alive, so it ended in all spades going to
work to dig a hole through the castle to Australia. These children, you
see, believed that the world was round, and that on the other side the
little Australian boys and girls were really walking wrong way up, like
flies on the ceiling, with their heads hanging down into the air.

The children dug and they dug and they dug, and their hands got sandy
and hot and red, and their faces got damp and shiny. The Lamb had tried
to eat the sand, and had cried so hard when he found that it was not,
as he had supposed, brown sugar, that he was now tired out, and was
lying asleep in a warm fat bunch in the middle of the half-finished
castle. This left his brothers and sisters free to work really hard, and
the hole that was to come out in Australia soon grew so deep that Jane,
who was called Pussy for short, begged the others to stop.

"Suppose the bottom of the hole gave way suddenly," said she, "and you
tumbled out among the little Australians, all the sand would get in
their eyes."

"Yes," said Robert; "and they would hate us, and throw stones at us, and
not let us see the kangaroos, or opossums, or bluegums, or Emu Brand
birds, or anything."

Cyril and Anthea knew that Australia was not quite so near as all that,
but they agreed to stop using the spades and to go on with their hands.
This was quite easy, because the sand at the bottom of the hole was very
soft and fine and dry, like sea-sand. And there were little shells in
it.

"Fancy it having been wet sea here once, all sloppy and shiny," said
Jane, "with fishes and conger-eels and coral and mermaids."

"And masts of ships and wrecked Spanish treasure. I wish we could find a
gold doubloon, or something," Cyril said.

"How did the sea get carried away?" Robert asked.

"Not in a pail, silly," said his brother.

"Father says the earth got too hot underneath, as you do in bed
sometimes, so it just hunched up its shoulders, and the sea had to slip
off, like the blankets do us, and the shoulder was left sticking out,
and turned into dry land. Let's go and look for shells; I think that
little cave looks likely, and I see something sticking out there like a
bit of wrecked ship's anchor, and it's beastly hot in the Australian
hole."

The others agreed, but Anthea went on digging. She always liked to
finish a thing when she had once begun it. She felt it would be a
disgrace to leave that hole without getting through to Australia.

The cave was disappointing, because there were no shells, and the
wrecked ship's anchor turned out to be only the broken end of a pick-axe
handle, and the cave party were just making up their minds that sand
makes you thirstier when it is not by the seaside, and someone had
suggested that they all go home for lemonade, when Anthea suddenly
screamed--

"Cyril! Come here! Oh, come quick--It's alive! It'll get away! Quick!"

They all hurried back.

"It's a rat, I shouldn't wonder," said Robert. "Father says they infest
old places--and this must be pretty old if the sea was here thousands of
years ago"--

"Perhaps it is a snake," said Jane, shuddering.

"Let's look," said Cyril, jumping into the hole. "I'm not afraid of
snakes. I like them. If it is a snake I'll tame it, and it will follow
me everywhere, and I'll let it sleep round my neck at night."

"No, you won't," said Robert firmly. He shared Cyril's bedroom. "But
you may if it's a rat."

[Illustration: Anthea suddenly screamed, "It's alive!"]

"Oh, don't be silly!" said Anthea; "it's not a rat, it's _much_ bigger.
And it's not a snake. It's got feet; I saw them; and fur! No--not the
spade. You'll hurt it! Dig with your hands."

"And let _it_ hurt _me_ instead! That's so likely, isn't it?" said
Cyril, seizing a spade.

"Oh, don't!" said Anthea. "Squirrel, _don't_. I--it sounds silly, but it
said something. It really and truly did"--

"What?"

"It said, 'You let me alone.'"

But Cyril merely observed that his sister must have gone off her head,
and he and Robert dug with spades while Anthea sat on the edge of the
hole, jumping up and down with hotness and anxiety. They dug carefully,
and presently everyone could see that there really was something moving
in the bottom of the Australian hole.

Then Anthea cried out, "_I'm_ not afraid. Let me dig," and fell on her
knees and began to scratch like a dog does when he has suddenly
remembered where it was that he buried his bone.

"Oh, I felt fur," she cried, half laughing and half crying. "I did
indeed! I did!" when suddenly a dry husky voice in the sand made them
all jump back, and their hearts jumped nearly as fast as they did.

"Let me alone," it said. And now everyone heard the voice and looked at
the others to see if they had heard it too.

"But we want to see you," said Robert bravely.

"I wish you'd come out," said Anthea, also taking courage.

"Oh, well--if that's your wish," the voice said, and the sand stirred
and spun and scattered, and something brown and furry and fat came
rolling out into the hole, and the sand fell off it, and it sat there
yawning and rubbing the ends of its eyes with its hands.

"I believe I must have dropped asleep," it said, stretching itself.

The children stood round the hole in a ring, looking at the creature
they had found. It was worth looking at. Its eyes were on long horns
like a snail's eyes, and it could move them in and out like telescopes;
it had ears like a bat's ears, and its tubby body was shaped like a
spider's and covered with thick soft fur; its legs and arms were furry
too, and it had hands and feet like a monkey's.

"What on earth is it?" Jane said. "Shall we take it home?"

The thing turned its long eyes to look at her, and said--

"Does she always talk nonsense, or is it only the rubbish on her head
that makes her silly?"

It looked scornfully at Jane's hat as it spoke.

"She doesn't mean to be silly," Anthea said gently; "we none of us do,
whatever you may think! Don't be frightened; we don't want to hurt you,
you know."

"Hurt _me_!" it said. "_Me_ frightened? Upon my word! Why, you talk as
if I were nobody in particular." All its fur stood out like a cat's when
it is going to fight.

"Well," said Anthea, still kindly, "perhaps if we knew who you are in
particular we could think of something to say that wouldn't make you
angry. Everything we've said so far seems to have done so. Who are you?
And don't get angry! Because really we don't know."

"You don't know?" it said. "Well, I knew the world had
changed--but--well, really--Do you mean to tell me seriously you don't
know a Psammead when you see one?"

"A Sammyadd? That's Greek to me."

"So it is to everyone," said the creature sharply. "Well, in plain
English, then, a _Sand-fairy_. Don't you know a Sand-fairy when you see
one?"

It looked so grieved and hurt that Jane hastened to say, "Of course I
see you are, _now_. It's quite plain now one comes to look at you."

"You came to look at me, several sentences ago," it said crossly,
beginning to curl up again in the sand.

"Oh--don't go away again! Do talk some more," Robert cried. "I didn't
know you were a Sand-fairy, but I knew directly I saw you that you were
much the wonderfullest thing I'd ever seen."

The Sand-fairy seemed a shade less disagreeable after this.

"It isn't talking I mind," it said, "as long as you're reasonably civil.
But I'm not going to make polite conversation for you. If you talk
nicely to me, perhaps I'll answer you, and perhaps I won't. Now say
something."

Of course no one could think of anything to say, but at last Robert
thought of "How long have you lived here?" and he said it at once.

"Oh, ages--several thousand years," replied the Psammead.

"Tell us about it. Do."

"It's all in books."

"_You_ aren't!" Jane said. "Oh, tell us everything you can about
yourself! We don't know anything about you, and you _are_ so nice."

The Sand-fairy smoothed his long rat-like whiskers and smiled between
them.

"Do please tell!" said the children all together.

It is wonderful how quickly you get used to things, even the most
astonishing. Five minutes before, the children had had no more idea than
you had that there was such a thing as a Sand-fairy in the world, and
now they were talking to it as though they had known it all their lives.

It drew its eyes in and said--

"How very sunny it is--quite like old times! Where do you get your
Megatheriums from now?"

"What?" said the children all at once. It is very difficult always to
remember that "what" is not polite, especially in moments of surprise or
agitation.

"Are Pterodactyls plentiful now?" the Sand-fairy went on.

The children were unable to reply.

"What do you have for breakfast?" the Fairy said impatiently, "and who
gives it to you?"

"Eggs and bacon, and bread and milk, and porridge and things.
Mother gives it to us. What are Mega-what's-its-names and
Ptero-what-do-you-call-thems? And does anyone have them for breakfast?"

"Why, almost everyone had Pterodactyl for breakfast in my time!
Pterodactyls were something like crocodiles and something like birds--I
believe they were very good grilled. You see, it was like this: of
course there were heaps of Sand-fairies then, and in the morning early
you went out and hunted for them, and when you'd found one it gave you
your wish. People used to send their little boys down to the seashore in
the morning before breakfast to get the day's wishes, and very often the
eldest boy in the family would be told to wish for a Megatherium, ready
jointed for cooking. It was as big as an elephant, you see, so there was
a good deal of meat on it. And if they wanted fish, the Ichthyosaurus
was asked for,--he was twenty to forty feet long, so there was plenty of
him. And for poultry there was the Plesiosaurus; there were nice
pickings on that too. Then the other children could wish for other
things. But when people had dinner-parties it was nearly always
Megatheriums; and Ichthyosaurus, because his fins were a great delicacy
and his tail made soup."

"There must have been heaps and heaps of cold meat left over," said
Anthea, who meant to be a good housekeeper some day.

"Oh no," said the Psammead, "that would never have done. Why, of course
at sunset what was left over turned into stone. You find the stone bones
of the Megatherium and things all over the place even now, they tell
me."

"Who tell you?" asked Cyril; but the Sand-fairy frowned and began to dig
very fast with its furry hands.

"Oh, don't go!" they all cried; "tell us more about when it was
Megatheriums for breakfast! Was the world like this then?"

It stopped digging.

"Not a bit," it said; "it was nearly all sand where I lived, and coal
grew on trees, and the periwinkles were as big as tea-trays--you find
them now; they're turned into stone. We Sand-fairies used to live on the
seashore, and the children used to come with their little flint-spades
and flint-pails and make castles for us to live in. That's thousands of
years ago, but I hear that children still build castles on the sand.
It's difficult to break yourself of a habit."

"But why did you stop living in the castles?" asked Robert.

"It's a sad story," said the Psammead gloomily. "It was because they
_would_ build moats to the castles, and the nasty wet bubbling sea used
to come in, and of course as soon as a Sand-fairy got wet it caught
cold, and generally died. And so there got to be fewer and fewer, and,
whenever you found a fairy and had a wish, you used to wish for a
Megatherium, and eat twice as much as you wanted, because it might be
weeks before you got another wish."

"And did _you_ get wet?" Robert inquired.

The Sand-fairy shuddered. "Only once," it said; "the end of the twelfth
hair of my top left whisker--I feel the place still in damp weather. It
was only once, but it was quite enough for me. I went away as soon as
the sun had dried my poor dear whisker. I scurried away to the back of
the beach, and dug myself a house deep in warm dry sand, and there I've
been ever since. And the sea changed its lodgings afterwards. And now
I'm not going to tell you another thing."

"Just one more, please," said the children. "Can you give wishes now?"

"Of course," said it; "didn't I give you yours a few minutes ago? You
said, 'I wish you'd come out,' and I did."

"Oh, please, mayn't we have another?"

"Yes, but be quick about it. I'm tired of you."

I daresay you have often thought what you would do if you had three
wishes given you, and have despised the old man and his wife in the
black-pudding story, and felt certain that if you had the chance you
could think of three really useful wishes without a moment's hesitation.
These children had often talked this matter over, but, now the chance
had suddenly come to them, they could not make up their minds.

"Quick," said the Sand-fairy crossly. No one could think of anything,
only Anthea did manage to remember a private wish of her own and Jane's
which they had never told the boys. She knew the boys would not care
about it--but still it was better than nothing.

"I wish we were all as beautiful as the day," she said in a great hurry.

The children looked at each other, but each could see that the others
were not any better-looking than usual. The Psammead pushed out his long
eyes, and seemed to be holding its breath and swelling itself out till
it was twice as fat and furry as before. Suddenly it let its breath go
in a long sigh.

"I'm really afraid I can't manage it," it said apologetically; "I must
be out of practice."

The children were horribly disappointed.

"Oh, _do_ try again!" they said.

"Well," said the Sand-fairy, "the fact is, I was keeping back a little
strength to give the rest of you your wishes with. If you'll be
contented with one wish a day among the lot of you I daresay I can
screw myself up to it. Do you agree to that?"

"Yes, oh yes!" said Jane and Anthea. The boys nodded. They did not
believe the Sand-fairy could do it. You can always make girls believe
things much easier than you can boys.

It stretched out its eyes farther than ever, and swelled and swelled and
swelled.

"I do hope it won't hurt itself," said Anthea.

"Or crack its skin," Robert said anxiously.

Everyone was very much relieved when the Sand-fairy, after getting so
big that it almost filled up the hole in the sand, suddenly let out its
breath and went back to its proper size.

"That's all right," it said, panting heavily. "It'll come easier
to-morrow."

"Did it hurt much?" said Anthea.

"Only my poor whisker, thank you," said he, "but you're a kind and
thoughtful child. Good day."

It scratched suddenly and fiercely with its hands and feet, and
disappeared in the sand.

Then the children looked at each other, and each child suddenly found
itself alone with three perfect strangers, all radiantly beautiful.

They stood for some moments in silence. Each thought that its brothers
and sisters had wandered off, and that these strange children had stolen
up unnoticed while it was watching the swelling form of the Sand-fairy.
Anthea spoke first--

"Excuse me," she said very politely to Jane, who now had enormous blue
eyes and a cloud of russet hair, "but have you seen two little boys and
a little girl anywhere about?"

"I was just going to ask you that," said Jane. And then Cyril cried--

"Why, it's _you_! I know the hole in your pinafore! You _are_ Jane,
aren't you? And you're the Panther; I can see your dirty handkerchief
that you forgot to change after you'd cut your thumb! The wish _has_
come off, after all. I say, am I as handsome as you are?"

"If you're Cyril, I liked you much better as you were before," said
Anthea decidedly. "You look like the picture of the young chorister,
with your golden hair; you'll die young, I shouldn't wonder. And if
that's Robert, he's like an Italian organ-grinder. His hair's all
black."

"You two girls are like Christmas cards, then--that's all--silly
Christmas cards," said Robert angrily. "And Jane's hair is simply
carrots."

It was indeed of that Venetian tint so much admired by artists.

"Well, it's no use finding fault with each other," said Anthea; "let's
get the Lamb and lug it home to dinner. The servants will admire us most
awfully, you'll see."

Baby was just waking up when they got to him, and not one of the
children but was relieved to find that he at least was not as beautiful
as the day, but just the same as usual.

"I suppose he's too young to have wishes naturally," said Jane. "We
shall have to mention him specially next time."

Anthea ran forward and held out her arms.

"Come, then," she said.

The Baby looked at her disapprovingly, and put a sandy pink thumb in his
mouth. Anthea was his favourite sister.

"Come, then," she said.

"G'way 'long!" said the Baby.

"Come to own Pussy," said Jane.

"Wants my Panty," said the Lamb dismally, and his lip trembled.

"Here, come on, Veteran," said Robert, "come and have a yidey on Yobby's
back."

"Yah, narky narky boy," howled the Baby, giving way altogether. Then the
children knew the worst. _The Baby did not know them!_

[Illustration: The baby did not know them!]

They looked at each other in despair, and it was terrible to each, in
this dire emergency, to meet only the beautiful eyes of perfect
strangers, instead of the merry, friendly, commonplace, twinkling, jolly
little eyes of its own brothers and sisters.

"This is most truly awful," said Cyril when he had tried to lift up the
Lamb, and the Lamb had scratched like a cat and bellowed like a bull!
"We've got to _make friends_ with him! I can't carry him home screaming
like that. Fancy having to make friends with our own baby!--it's too
silly."

That, however, was exactly what they had to do. It took over an hour,
and the task was not rendered any easier by the fact that the Lamb was
by this time as hungry as a lion and as thirsty as a desert.

At last he consented to allow these strangers to carry him home by
turns, but as he refused to hold on to such new acquaintances he was a
dead weight, and most exhausting.

"Thank goodness, we're home!" said Jane, staggering through the iron
gate to where Martha, the nursemaid, stood at the front door shading her
eyes with her hand and looking out anxiously. "Here! Do take Baby!"

Martha snatched the Baby from her arms.

"Thanks be, _he's_ safe back," she said. "Where are the others, and
whoever to goodness gracious are all of you?"

"We're _us_, of course," said Robert.

"And who's Us, when you're at home?" asked Martha scornfully.

"I tell you it's _us_, only we're beautiful as the day," said Cyril.
"I'm Cyril, and these are the others, and we're jolly hungry. Let us in,
and don't be a silly idiot."

Martha merely dratted Cyril's impudence and tried to shut the door in
his face.

"I know we _look_ different, but I'm Anthea, and we're so tired, and
it's long past dinner-time."

"Then go home to your dinners, whoever you are; and if our children put
you up to this play-acting you can tell them from me they'll catch it,
so they know what to expect!" With that she did bang the door. Cyril
rang the bell violently. No answer. Presently cook put her head out of a
bedroom window and said--

"If you don't take yourselves off, and that precious sharp, I'll go and
fetch the police." And she slammed down the window.

"It's no good," said Anthea. "Oh, do, do come away before we get sent to
prison!"

The boys said it was nonsense, and the law of England couldn't put you
in prison for just being as beautiful as the day, but all the same they
followed the others out into the lane.

"We shall be our proper selves after sunset, I suppose," said Jane.

"I don't know," Cyril said sadly; "it mayn't be like that now--things
have changed a good deal since Megatherium times."

"Oh," cried Anthea suddenly, "perhaps we shall turn into stone at
sunset, like the Megatheriums did, so that there mayn't be any of us
left over for the next day."

She began to cry, so did Jane. Even the boys turned pale. No one had the
heart to say anything.

It was a horrible afternoon. There was no house near where the children
could beg a crust of bread or even a glass of water. They were afraid to
go to the village, because they had seen Martha go down there with a
basket, and there was a local constable. True, they were all as
beautiful as the day, but that is a poor comfort when you are as hungry
as a hunter and as thirsty as a sponge.

Three times they tried in vain to get the servants in the White House to
let them in and listen to their tale. And then Robert went alone, hoping
to be able to climb in at one of the back windows and so open the door
to the others. But all the windows were out of reach, and Martha emptied
a toilet-jug of cold water over him from a top window, and said--

"Go along with you, you nasty little Eye-talian monkey."

It came at last to their sitting down in a row under the hedge, with
their feet in a dry ditch, waiting for sunset, and wondering whether,
when the sun _did_ set, they would turn into stone, or only into their
own old natural selves; and each of them still felt lonely and among
strangers, and tried not to look at the others, for, though their voices
were their own, their faces were so radiantly beautiful as to be quite
irritating to look at.

"I don't believe we _shall_ turn to stone," said Robert, breaking a long
miserable silence, "because the Sand-fairy said he'd give us another
wish to-morrow, and he couldn't if we were stone, could he?"

The others said "No," but they weren't at all comforted.

Another silence, longer and more miserable, was broken by Cyril's
suddenly saying, "I don't want to frighten you girls, but I believe it's
beginning with me already. My foot's quite dead. I'm turning to stone, I
know I am, and so will you in a minute."

"Never mind," said Robert kindly, "perhaps you'll be the only stone one,
and the rest of us will be all right, and we'll cherish your statue and
hang garlands on it."

But when it turned out that Cyril's foot had only gone to sleep through
his sitting too long with it under him, and when it came to life in an
agony of pins and needles, the others were quite cross.

"Giving us such a fright for nothing!" said Anthea.

[Illustration: Martha emptied a toilet-jug of cold water over him]

The third and miserablest silence of all was broken by Jane. She
said--

"If we _do_ come out of this all right, we'll ask the Sammyadd to make
it so that the servants don't notice anything different, no matter what
wishes we have."

The others only grunted. They were too wretched even to make good
resolutions.

At last hunger and fright and crossness and tiredness--four very nasty
things--all joined together to bring one nice thing, and that was sleep.
The children lay asleep in a row, with their beautiful eyes shut and
their beautiful mouths open. Anthea woke first. The sun had set, and the
twilight was coming on.

Anthea pinched herself very hard, to make sure, and when she found she
could still feel pinching she decided that she was not stone, and then
she pinched the others. They, also, were soft.

"Wake up," she said, almost in tears for joy; "it's all right, we're not
stone. And oh, Cyril, how nice and ugly you do look, with your old
freckles and your brown hair and your little eyes. And so do you all!"
she added, so that they might not feel jealous.

When they got home they were very much scolded by Martha, who told them
about the strange children.

"A good-looking lot, I must say, but that impudent."

"I know," said Robert, who knew by experience how hopeless it would be
to try to explain things to Martha.

"And where on earth have you been all this time, you naughty little
things, you?"

"In the lane."

"Why didn't you come home hours ago?"

"We couldn't because of _them_," said Anthea.

"Who?"

"The children who were as beautiful as the day. They kept us there till
after sunset. We couldn't come back till they'd gone. You don't know how
we hated them! Oh, do, do give us some supper--we are so hungry."

"Hungry! I should think so," said Martha angrily; "out all day like
this. Well, I hope it'll be a lesson to you not to go picking up with
strange children--down here after measles, as likely as not! Now mind,
if you see them again, don't you speak to them--not one word nor so
much as a look--but come straight away and tell me. I'll spoil their
beauty for them!"

"If ever we _do_ see them again we'll tell you," Anthea said; and
Robert, fixing his eyes fondly on the cold beef that was being brought
in on a tray by cook, added in heartfelt undertones--

"And we'll take jolly good care we never _do_ see them again."

And they never have.




CHAPTER II

GOLDEN GUINEAS


Anthea woke in the morning from a very real sort of dream, in which she
was walking in the Zoological Gardens on a pouring wet day without an
umbrella. The animals seemed desperately unhappy because of the rain,
and were all growling gloomily. When she awoke, both the growling and
the rain went on just the same. The growling was the heavy regular
breathing of her sister Jane, who had a slight cold and was still
asleep. The rain fell in slow drops on to Anthea's face from the wet
corner of a bath-towel out of which her brother Robert was gently
squeezing the water, to wake her up, as he now explained.

"Oh, drop it!" she said rather crossly; so he did, for he was not a
brutal brother, though very ingenious in apple-pie beds, booby-traps,
original methods of awakening sleeping relatives, and the other
little accomplishments which make home happy.

[Illustration: The rain fell in slow drops on to Anthea's face]

"I had such a funny dream," Anthea began.

"So did I," said Jane, wakening suddenly and without warning. "I dreamed
we found a Sand-fairy in the gravel-pits, and it said it was a Sammyadd,
and we might have a new wish every day, and"----

"But that's what _I_ dreamed," said Robert; "I was just going to tell
you,--and we had the first wish directly it said so. And I dreamed you
girls were donkeys enough to ask for us all to be beautiful as day, and
we jolly well were, and it was perfectly beastly."

"But _can_ different people all dream the same thing?" said Anthea,
sitting up in bed, "because I dreamed all that as well as about the Zoo
and the rain; and Baby didn't know us in my dream, and the servants shut
us out of the house because the radiantness of our beauty was such a
complete disguise, and"----

The voice of the eldest brother sounded from across the landing.

"Come on, Robert," it said, "you'll be late for breakfast again--unless
you mean to shirk your bath as you did on Tuesday."

"I say, come here a second," Robert replied; "I didn't shirk it; I had
it after brekker in father's dressing-room because ours was emptied
away."

Cyril appeared in the doorway, partially clothed.

"Look here," said Anthea, "we've all had such an odd dream. We've all
dreamed we found a Sand-fairy."

Her voice died away before Cyril's contemptuous glance.

"Dream?" he said; "you little sillies, it's _true_. I tell you it all
happened. That's why I'm so keen on being down early. We'll go up there
directly after brekker, and have another wish. Only we'll make up our
minds, solid, before we go, what it is we do want, and no one must ask
for anything unless the others agree first. No more peerless beauties
for this child, thank you. Not if I know it!"

The other three dressed, with their mouths open. If all that dream about
the Sand-fairy was real, this real dressing seemed very like a dream,
the girls thought. Jane felt that Cyril was right, but Anthea was not
sure, till after they had seen Martha and heard her full and plain
reminders about their naughty conduct the day before. Then Anthea was
sure.

"Because," said she, "servants never dream anything but the things in
the Dream-book, like snakes and oysters and going to a wedding--that
means a funeral, and snakes are a false female friend, and oysters are
babies."

"Talking of babies," said Cyril, "where's the Lamb?"

"Martha's going to take him to Rochester to see her cousins. Mother said
she might. She's dressing him now," said Jane, "in his very best coat
and hat. Bread-and-butter, please."

"She seems to like taking him too," said Robert in a tone of wonder.

"Servants _do_ like taking babies to see their relations," Cyril said;
"I've noticed it before--especially in their best clothes."

"I expect they pretend they're their own babies, and that they're not
servants at all, but married to noble dukes of high degree, and they say
the babies are the little dukes and duchesses," Jane suggested dreamily,
taking more marmalade. "I expect that's what Martha'll say to her
cousin. She'll enjoy herself most frightfully."

"She won't enjoy herself most frightfully carrying our infant duke to
Rochester," said Robert; "not if she's anything like me--she won't."

"Fancy walking to Rochester with the Lamb on your back!" said Cyril in
full agreement.

"She's gone by the carrier's cart," said Jane. "Let's see them off, then
we shall have done a polite and kindly act, and we shall be quite sure
we've got rid of them for the day."

So they did.

Martha wore her Sunday dress of two shades of purple, so tight in the
chest that it made her stoop, and her blue hat with the pink
cornflowers and white ribbon. She had a yellow-lace collar with a green
bow. And the Lamb had indeed his very best cream-colored silk coat and
hat. It was a smart party that the carrier's cart picked up at the Cross
Roads. When its white tilt and red wheels had slowly vanished in a swirl
of chalk-dust--

"And now for the Sammyadd!" said Cyril, and off they went.

As they went they decided on the wish they would ask for. Although they
were all in a great hurry they did not try to climb down the sides of
the gravel-pit, but went round by the safe lower road, as if they had
been carts.

They had made a ring of stones round the place where the Sand-fairy had
disappeared, so they easily found the spot. The sun was burning and
bright, and the sky was deep blue--without a cloud. The sand was very
hot to touch.

"Oh--suppose it was only a dream, after all," Robert said as the boys
uncovered their spades from the sand-heap where they had buried them
and began to dig.

"Suppose you were a sensible chap," said Cyril; "one's quite as likely
as the other!"

"Suppose you kept a civil tongue in your head," Robert snapped.

"Suppose we girls take a turn," said Jane, laughing. "You boys seem to
be getting very warm."

"Suppose you don't come putting your silly oar in," said Robert, who was
now warm indeed.

"We won't," said Anthea quickly. "Robert dear, don't be so grumpy--we
won't say a word, you shall be the one to speak to the Fairy and tell
him what we've decided to wish for. You'll say it much better than we
shall."

"Suppose you drop being a little humbug," said Robert, but not crossly.
"Look out--dig with your hands, now!"

So they did, and presently uncovered the spider-shaped brown hairy body,
long arms and legs, bat's ears and snail's eyes of the Sand-fairy
himself. Everyone drew a deep breath of satisfaction, for now of course
it couldn't have been a dream.

The Psammead sat up and shook the sand out of its fur.

"How's your left whisker this morning?" said Anthea politely.

"Nothing to boast of," said it; "it had rather a restless night. But
thank you for asking."

"I say," said Robert, "do you feel up to giving wishes to-day, because
we very much want an extra besides the regular one? The extra's a very
little one," he added reassuringly.

"Humph!" said the Sand-fairy. (If you read this story aloud, please
pronounce "humph" exactly as it is spelt, for that is how he said it.)
"Humph! Do you know, until I heard you being disagreeable to each other
just over my head, and so loud too, I really quite thought I had dreamed
you all. I do have very odd dreams sometimes."

"Do you?" Jane hurried to say, so as to get away from the subject of
disagreeableness. "I wish," she added politely, "you'd tell us about
your dreams--they must be awfully interesting"--

"Is that the day's wish?" said the Sand-fairy, yawning.

Cyril muttered something about "just like a girl," and the rest stood
silent. If they said "Yes," then good-bye to the other wishes they had
decided to ask for. If they said "No," it would be very rude, and they
had all been taught manners, and had learned a little too, which is not
at all the same thing. A sigh of relief broke from all lips when the
Sand-fairy said--

"If I do, I shan't have strength to give you a second wish; not even
good tempers, or common-sense, or manners, or little things like that."

"We don't want you to put yourself out at all about _these_ things, we
can manage them quite well ourselves," said Cyril eagerly; while the
others looked guiltily at each other, and wished the Fairy would not
keep all on about good tempers, but give them one good scolding if it
wanted to, and then have done with it.

"Well," said the Psammead, putting out his long snail's eyes so suddenly
that one of them nearly went into the round boy's eye of Robert, "let's
have the little wish first."

"We don't want the servants to notice the gifts you give us."

"Are kind enough to give us," said Anthea in a whisper.

"Are kind enough to give us, I mean," said Robert.

The Fairy swelled himself out a bit, let his breath go, and said--

"I've done _that_ for you--it was quite easy. People don't notice things
much, anyway. What's the next wish?"

"We want," said Robert slowly, "to be rich beyond the dreams of
something or other."

"Avarice," said Jane.

"So it is," said the Fairy unexpectedly. "But it won't do you much good,
that's one comfort," it muttered to itself. "Come--I can't go beyond
dreams, you know! How much do you want, and will you have it in gold or
notes?"

"Gold, please--and millions of it"--

"This gravel-pit full be enough?" said the Fairy in an off-hand manner.

"Oh _yes_"--

"Then go out before I begin, or you'll be buried alive in it."

It made its skinny arms so long, and waved them so frighteningly, that
the children ran as hard as they could towards the road by which carts
used to come to the gravel-pits. Only Anthea had presence of mind enough
to shout a timid "Good-morning, I hope your whisker will be better
to-morrow," as she ran.

On the road they turned and looked back, and they had to shut their
eyes, and open them very slowly, a little bit at a time, because the
sight was too dazzling for their eyes to be able to bear. It was
something like trying to look at the sun at high noon on Midsummer Day.
For the whole of the sand-pit was full, right up to the very top, with
new shining gold pieces, and all the little bank-martins' little front
doors were covered out of sight. Where the road for carts wound into the
gravel-pit the gold lay in heaps like stones lie by the roadside, and a
great bank of shining gold shelved down from where it lay flat and
smooth between the tall sides of the gravel-pit. And all the gleaming
heaps was minted gold. And on the sides and edges of these countless
coins the mid-day sun shone and sparkled, and glowed and gleamed till
the quarry looked like the mouth of a smelting furnace, or one of the
fairy halls that you see sometimes in the sky at sunset.

The children stood with their mouths open, and no one said a word.

At last Robert stooped and picked up one of the loose coins from the
edge of the heap by the cart-road, and looked at it. He looked on both
sides. Then he said in a low voice, quite different to his own, "It's
not sovereigns."

"It's gold, anyway," said Cyril. And now they all began to talk at once.
They all picked up the golden treasure by handfuls and let it run
through their fingers like water, and the chink it made as it fell was
wonderful music. At first they quite forgot to think of spending the
money, it was so nice to play with. Jane sat down between two heaps of
the gold, and Robert began to bury her, as you bury your father in sand
when you are at the seaside and he has gone to sleep on the beach with
his newspaper over his face. But Jane was not half buried before she
cried out, "Oh stop, it's too heavy! It hurts!"

Robert said "Bosh!" and went on.

"Let me out, I tell you," cried Jane, and was taken out, very white, and
trembling a little.

"You've no idea what it's like," said she; "it's like stones on you--or
like chains."

"Look here," Cyril said, "if this is to do us any good, it's no good our
staying gasping at it like this. Let's fill our pockets and go and buy
things. Don't you forget, it won't last after sunset. I wish we'd asked
the Sammyadd why things don't turn to stone. Perhaps this will. I'll
tell you what, there's a pony and cart in the village."

"Do you want to buy that?" asked Jane.

"No, silly,--we'll _hire_ it. And then we'll go to Rochester and buy
heaps and heaps of things. Look here, let's each take as much as we can
carry. But it's not sovereigns. They've got a man's head on one side and
a thing like the ace of spades on the other. Fill your pockets with it,
I tell you, and come along. You can talk as we go--if you _must_ talk."

Cyril sat down and began to fill his pockets.

"You made fun of me for getting father to have nine pockets in my suit,"
said he, "but now you see!"

They did. For when Cyril had filled his nine pockets and his
handkerchief and the space between himself and his shirt front with the
gold coins, he had to stand up. But he staggered, and had to sit down
again in a hurry.

"Throw out some of the cargo," said Robert. "You'll sink the ship, old
chap. That comes of nine pockets."

And Cyril had to do so.

Then they set off to walk to the village. It was more than a mile, and
the road was very dusty indeed, and the sun seemed to get hotter and
hotter, and the gold in their pockets got heavier and heavier.

It was Jane who said, "I don't see how we're to spend it all. There must
be thousands of pounds among the lot of us. I'm going to leave some of
mine behind this stump in the hedge. And directly we get to the village
we'll buy some biscuits; I know it's long past dinner-time." She took
out a handful or two of gold and hid it in the hollows of an old
hornbeam. "How round and yellow they are," she said. "Don't you wish
they were made of gingerbread and we were going to eat them?"

"Well, they're not, and we're not," said Cyril. "Come on!"

But they came on heavily and wearily. Before they reached the village,
more than one stump in the hedge concealed its little hoard of hidden
treasure. Yet they reached the village with about twelve hundred guineas
in their pockets. But in spite of this inside wealth they looked
quite ordinary outside, and no one would have thought they could have
more than a half-crown each at the outside. The haze of heat, the blue
of the wood smoke, made a sort of dim misty cloud over the red roofs of
the village. The four sat down heavily on the first bench to which they
came. It happened to be outside the Blue Boar Inn.

[Illustration: He staggered, and had to sit down again in a hurry]

It was decided that Cyril should go into the Blue Boar and ask for
ginger-beer, because, as Anthea said, "It was not wrong for men to go
into beer-saloons, only for children. And Cyril is nearer being a man
than us, because he is the eldest." So he went. The others sat in the
sun and waited.

"Oh, how hot it is!" said Robert. "Dogs put their tongues out when
they're hot; I wonder if it would cool us at all to put out ours?"

"We might try," Jane said; and they all put their tongues out as far as
ever they could go, so that it quite stretched their throats, but it
only seemed to make them thirstier than ever, besides annoying everyone
who went by. So they took their tongues in again, just as Cyril came
back with ginger-beer.

"I had to pay for it out of my own money, though, that I was going to
buy rabbits with," he said. "They wouldn't change the gold. And when I
pulled out a handful the man just laughed and said it was card-counters.
And I got some sponge-cakes too, out of a glass jar on the bar-counter.
And some biscuits with caraways in."

The sponge-cakes were both soft and dry and the biscuits were dry too,
and yet soft, which biscuits ought not to be. But the ginger-beer made
up for everything.

"It's my turn now to try to buy something with the money," Anthea said;
"I'm next eldest. Where is the pony-cart kept?"

It was at The Chequers, and Anthea went in the back way to the yard,
because they all knew that little girls ought not to go into the bars of
beer-saloons. She came out, as she herself said, "pleased but not
proud."

"He'll be ready in a brace of shakes, he says," she remarked, "and he's
to have one sovereign--or whatever it is--to drive us into Rochester and
back, besides waiting there till we've got everything we want. I think I
managed very well."

"You think yourself jolly clever, I daresay," said Cyril moodily. "How
did you do it?"

"I wasn't jolly clever enough to go taking handfuls of money out of my
pocket, to make it seem cheap, anyway," she retorted. "I just found a
young man doing something to a horse's legs with a sponge and a pail.
And I held out one sovereign, and I said--'Do you know what this is?' He
said 'No,' and he'd call his father. And the old man came, and he said
it was a spade guinea; and he said was it my own to do as I liked with,
and I said 'Yes'; and I asked about the pony-cart, and I said he could
have the guinea if he'd drive us into Rochester. And his name is S.
Crispin. And he said, 'Right oh.'"

It was a new sensation to be driven in a smart pony-trap along pretty
country roads; it was very pleasant too (which is not always the case
with new sensations), quite apart from the beautiful plans of spending
the money which each child made as they went along, silently of course
and quite to itself, for they felt it would never have done to let the
old innkeeper hear them talk in the affluent sort of way in which they
were thinking. The old man put them down by the bridge at their request.

"If you were going to buy a carriage and horses, where would you go?"
asked Cyril, as if he were only asking for the sake of something to say.

"Billy Peasemarsh, at the Saracen's Head," said the old man promptly.
"Though all forbid I should recommend any man where it's a question of
horses, no more than I'd take anybody else's recommending if I was
a-buying one. But if your pa's thinking of a rig of any sort, there
ain't a straighter man in Rochester, nor civiller spoken, than Billy,
though I says it."

"Thank you," said Cyril. "The Saracen's Head."

And now the children began to see one of the laws of nature turn upside
down and stand on its head like an acrobat. Any grown-up person would
tell you that money is hard to get and easy to spend. But the fairy
money had been easy to get, and spending it was not only hard, it was
almost impossible. The trades-people of Rochester seemed to shrink, to a
trades-person, from the glittering fairy gold ("furrin money" they
called it, for the most part).

To begin with, Anthea, who had had the misfortune to sit on her hat
earlier in the day, wished to buy another. She chose a very beautiful
one, trimmed with pink roses and the blue breasts of peacocks. It was
marked in the window, "Paris Model, three guineas."

"I'm glad," she said, "because it says guineas, and not sovereigns,
which we haven't got."

But when she took three of the spade guineas in her hand, which was by
this time rather dirty owing to her not having put on gloves before
going to the gravel-pit, the black-silk young lady in the shop looked
very hard at her, and went and whispered something to an older and
uglier lady, also in black silk, and then they gave her back the money
and said it was not current coin.

"It's good money," said Anthea, "and it's my own."

"I daresay," said the lady, "but it's not the kind of money that's
fashionable now, and we don't care about taking it."

"I believe they think we've stolen it," said Anthea, rejoining the
others in the street; "if we had gloves they wouldn't think we were so
dishonest. It's my hands being so dirty fills their minds with doubts."

So they chose a humble shop, and the girls bought cotton gloves, the
kind at a shilling, but when they offered a guinea the woman looked at
it through her spectacles and said she had no change; so the gloves had
to be paid for out of Cyril's money with which he meant to buy rabbits
and so had the green imitation crocodile-skin purse at nine-pence which
had been bought at the same time. They tried several more shops, the
kinds where you buy toys and perfume and silk handkerchiefs and books,
and fancy boxes of stationery, and photographs of objects of interest in
the vicinity. But nobody cared to change a guinea that day in Rochester,
and as they went from shop to shop they got dirtier and dirtier, and
their hair got more and more untidy, and Jane slipped and fell down on a
part of the road where a water cart had just gone by. Also they got very
hungry, but they found no one would give them anything to eat for their
guineas.

After trying two baker shops in vain, they became so hungry, perhaps
from the smell of the cake in the shops, as Cyril suggested, that they
formed a plan of campaign in whispers and carried it out in desperation.
They marched into a third baker shop,--Beale was his name,--and before
the people behind the counter could interfere each child had seized
three new penny buns, clapped the three together between its dirty
hands, and taken a big bite out of the triple sandwich. Then they stood
at bay, with the twelve buns in their hands and their mouths very full
indeed. The shocked baker's man bounded round the corner.

"Here," said Cyril, speaking as distinctly as he could, and holding out
the guinea he got ready before entering the shops, "pay yourself out of
that."

Mr. Beale snatched the coin, bit it, and put it in his pocket.

[Illustration: Mr. Beale snatched the coin, bit it, and put it in his
pocket]

"Off you go," he said, brief and stern like the man in the song.

"But the change?" said Anthea, who had a saving mind.

"Change!" said the man, "I'll change you! Hout you goes; and you may
think yourselves lucky I don't send for the police to find out where you
got it!"

In the Gardens of the Castle the millionaires finished the buns, and
though the curranty softness of these were delicious, and acted like a
charm in raising the spirits of the party, yet even the stoutest heart
quailed at the thought of venturing to sound Mr. Billy Peasemarsh at the
Saracen's Head on the subject of a horse and carriage. The boys would
have given up the idea, but Jane was always a hopeful child, and Anthea
generally an obstinate one, and their earnestness prevailed.

The whole party, by this time indescribably dirty, therefore betook
itself to the Saracen's Head. The yard-method of attack having been
successful at The Chequers, was tried again here. Mr. Peasemarsh was in
the yard, and Robert opened the business in these terms--

"They tell me you have a lot of horses and carriages to sell." It had
been agreed that Robert should be spokesman, because in books it is
always gentlemen who buy horses, and not ladies, and Cyril had had his
go at the Blue Boar.

"They tell you true, young man," said Mr. Peasemarsh. He was a long lean
man, with very blue eyes and a tight mouth and narrow lips.

"We should like to buy some, please," said Robert politely.

"I daresay you would."

"Will you show us a few, please? To choose from."

"Who are you a-kiddin of?" inquired Mr. Billy Peasemarsh. "Was you sent
here of a message?"

"I tell you," said Robert, "we want to buy some horses and carriages,
and a man told us you were straight and civil spoken, but I shouldn't
wonder if he was mistaken"--

"Upon my sacred!" said Mr. Peasemarsh. "Shall I trot the whole stable
out for your Honor's worship to see? Or shall I send round to the
Bishop's to see if he's a nag or two to dispose of?"

"Please do," said Robert, "if it's not too much trouble. It would be
very kind of you."

Mr. Peasemarsh put his hands in his pockets and laughed, and they did
not like the way he did it. Then he shouted "Willum!"

A stooping ostler appeared in a stable door.

"Here, Willum, come and look at this 'ere young dook! Wants to buy the
whole stud, lock, stock, and bar'l. And ain't got tuppence in his
pocket to bless hisself with, I'll go bail!"

Willum's eyes followed his master's pointing thumb with contemptuous
interest.

"Do 'e, for sure?" he said.

But Robert spoke, though both the girls were now pulling at his jacket
and begging him to "come along." He spoke, and he was very angry; he
said--

"I'm not a young duke, and I never pretended to be. And as for
tuppence--what do you call this?" And before the others could stop him
he had pulled out two fat handfuls of shining guineas, and held them out
for Mr. Peasemarsh to look at. He did look. He snatched one up in his
finger and thumb. He bit it, and Jane expected him to say, "The best
horse in my stables is at your service." But the others knew better.
Still it was a blow, even to the most desponding, when he said shortly--

"Willum, shut the yard doors;" and Willum grinned and went to shut them.

"Good-afternoon," said Robert hastily; "we shan't buy any horses now,
whatever you say, and I hope it'll be a lesson to you." He had seen a
little side gate open, and was moving towards it as he spoke. But Billy
Peasemarsh put himself in the way.

"Not so fast, you young off-scouring!" he said. "Willum, fetch the
pleece."

Willum went. The children stood huddled together like frightened sheep,
and Mr. Peasemarsh spoke to them till the pleece arrived. He said many
things. Among other things he said--

"Nice lot you are, aren't you, coming tempting honest men with your
guineas!"

"They _are_ our guineas," said Cyril boldly.

"Oh, of course we don't know all about that, no more we don't--oh
no--course not! And dragging little gells into it, too. 'Ere--I'll let
the gells go if you'll come along to the pleece quiet."

"We won't be let go," said Jane heroically; "not without the boys. It's
our money just as much as theirs, you wicked old man."

"Where'd you get it, then?" said the man, softening slightly, which was
not at all what the boys expected when Jane began to call names.

Jane cast a silent glance of agony at the others.

"Lost your tongue, eh? Got it fast enough when it's for calling names
with. Come, speak up! Where'd you get it?"

"Out of the gravel-pit," said truthful Jane.

"Next article," said the man.

"I tell you we did," Jane said. "There's a fairy there--all over brown
fur--with ears like a bat's and eyes like a snail's, and he gives you a
wish a day, and they all come true."

"Touched in the head, eh?" said the man in a low voice; "all the more
shame to you boys dragging the poor afflicted child into your sinful
burglaries."

"She's not mad; it's true," said Anthea; "there _is_ a fairy. If I ever
see him again I'll wish for something for you; at least I would if
vengeance wasn't wicked--so there!"

"Lor' lumme," said Billy Peasemarsh, "if there ain't another on 'em!"

And now Willum came back, with a spiteful grin on his face, and at his
back a policeman, with whom Mr. Peasemarsh spoke long in a hoarse
earnest whisper.

"I daresay you're right," said the policeman at last. "Anyway, I'll take
'em up on a charge of unlawful possession, pending inquiries. And the
magistrate will deal with the case. Send the afflicted ones to a home,
as likely as not, and the boys to a reformatory. Now then, come along,
youngsters! No use making a fuss. You bring the gells along, Mr.
Peasemarsh, sir, and I'll shepherd the boys."

Speechless with rage and horror, the four children were driven along the
streets of Rochester. Tears of anger and shame blinded them, so that
when Robert ran right into a passer-by he did not recognise her till a
well-known voice said, "Well, if ever I did! Oh, Master Robert, whatever
have you been a-doing of now?" And another voice, quite as well known,
said, "Panty; want go own Panty!"

They had run into Martha and the Baby!

[Illustration: They had run into Martha and the baby]

Martha behaved admirably. She refused to believe a word of the
policeman's story, or of Mr. Peasemarsh's either, even when they made
Robert turn out his pockets in an archway and show the guineas.

"I don't see nothing," she said. "You've gone out of your senses, you
two! There ain't any gold there--only the poor child's hands, all over
dirt, and like the very chimbley. Oh that I should ever see the day!"

And the children thought this very noble of Martha, even if rather
wicked, till they remembered how the Fairy had promised that the
servants should never notice any of the fairy gifts. So of course Martha
couldn't see the gold, and so was only speaking the truth, and that was
quite right, of course, but not extra noble.

It was getting dusk when they reached the police-station. The policeman
told his tale to an inspector, who sat in a large bare room with a thing
like a clumsy nursery-fender at one end to put prisoners in. Robert
wondered whether it was a cell or a dock.

"Produce the coins, officer," said the inspector.

"Turn out your pockets," said the constable.

Cyril desperately plunged his hands in his pockets, stood still a
moment, and then began to laugh--an odd sort of laugh that hurt, and
that felt much more like crying. His pockets were empty. So were the
pockets of the others. For of course at sunset all the fairy gold had
vanished away.

"Turn out your pockets, and stop that noise," said the inspector.

Cyril turned out his pockets, every one of the nine which enriched his
suit. And every pocket was empty.

"Well!" said the inspector.

"I don't know how they done it--artful little beggars! They walked in
front of me the 'ole way, so as for me to keep my eye on them and not to
attract a crowd and obstruct the traffic."

"It's very remarkable," said the inspector, frowning.

"If you've done a-browbeating of the innocent children," said Martha,
"I'll hire a private carriage and we'll drive home to their papa's
mansion. You'll hear about this again, young man!--I told you they
hadn't got any gold, when you were pretending to see it in their poor
helpless hands. It's early in the day for a constable on duty not to be
able to trust his own eyes. As to the other one, the less said the
better; he keeps the Saracen's Head, and he knows best what his liquor's
like."

[Illustration: He said, "Now then!" to the policeman and Mr. Peasemarsh]

"Take them away, for goodness' sake," said the inspector crossly. But as
they left the police-station he said, "Now then!" to the policeman and
Mr. Peasemarsh, and he said it twenty times as crossly as he had spoken
to Martha.

       *       *       *       *       *

Martha was as good as her word. She took them home in a very grand
carriage, because the carrier's cart was gone, and, though she had stood
by them so nobly with the police, she was so angry with them as soon as
they were alone for "trapesing into Rochester by themselves," that none
of them dared to mention the old man with the pony-cart from the
village who was waiting for them in Rochester. And so, after one day of
boundless wealth, the children found themselves sent to bed in deep
disgrace, and only enriched by two pairs of cotton gloves, dirty inside
because of the state of the hands they had been put on to cover, an
imitation crocodile-skin purse, and twelve penny buns, long since
digested.

The thing that troubled them most was the fear that the old gentleman's
guinea might have disappeared at sunset with all the rest, so they went
down to the village next day to apologise for not meeting him in
Rochester, and to _see_. They found him very friendly. The guinea had
not disappeared, and he had bored a hole in it and hung it on his
watch-chain. As for the guinea the baker took, the children felt they
_could_ not care whether it had vanished or not, which was not perhaps
very honest, but on the other hand was not wholly unnatural. But
afterwards this preyed on Anthea's mind, and at last she secretly sent
twelve postage stamps by post to "Mr. Beale, Baker, Rochester." Inside
she wrote, "To pay for the buns." I hope the guinea did disappear, for
that baker was really not at all a nice man, and, besides, penny buns
are seven for sixpence in all really respectable shops.




CHAPTER III

BEING WANTED


The morning after the children had been the possessors of boundless
wealth, and had been unable to buy anything really useful or enjoyable
with it, except two pairs of cotton gloves, twelve penny buns, an
imitation crocodile-skin purse, and a ride in a pony-cart, they awoke
without any of the enthusiastic happiness which they had felt on the
previous day when they remembered how they had had the luck to find a
Psammead, or Sand-fairy, and to receive its promise to grant them a new
wish every day. For now they had had two wishes, Beauty and Wealth, and
neither had exactly made them happy. But the happening of strange
things, even if they are not completely pleasant things, is more amusing
than those times when nothing happens but meals, and they are not always
completely pleasant, especially on the days when it is cold mutton or
hash.

There was no chance of talking things over before breakfast, because
everyone overslept itself, as it happened, and it needed a vigorous and
determined struggle to get dressed so as to be only ten minutes late for
breakfast. During this meal some efforts were made to deal with the
question of the Psammead in an impartial spirit, but it is very
difficult to discuss anything thoroughly and at the same time to attend
faithfully to your baby brother's breakfast needs. The Baby was
particularly lively that morning. He not only wriggled his body through
the bar of his high chair, and hung by his head, choking and purple, but
he seized a tablespoon with desperate suddenness, hit Cyril heavily on
the head with it, and then cried because it was taken away from him. He
put his fat fist in his bread-and-milk, and demanded "nam," which was
only allowed for tea. He sang, he put his feet on the table--he
clamoured to "go walky." The conversation was something like this--

"Look here--about that Sand-fairy---- Look out!--he'll have the milk
over."

Milk removed to a safe distance.

"Yes--about that Fairy---- No, Lamb dear, give Panther the narky poon."

Then Cyril tried. "Nothing we've had yet has turned out---- He nearly
had the mustard that time!"

"I wonder whether we'd better wish---- Hullo!--you've done it now, my
boy!" And in a flash of glass and pink baby-paws, the bowl of golden
carp in the middle of the table rolled on its side and poured a flood of
mixed water and gold-fish into the Baby's lap and into the laps of the
others.

Everyone was almost as much upset as the gold-fish; the Lamb only
remaining calm. When the pool on the floor had been mopped up, and the
leaping, gasping gold-fish had been collected and put back in the water,
the Baby was taken away to be entirely re-dressed by Martha, and most of
the others had to change completely. The pinafores and jackets that had
been bathed in gold-fish-and-water were hung out to dry, and then it
turned out that Jane must either mend the dress she had torn the day
before or appear all day in her best petticoat. It was white and soft
and frilly, and trimmed with lace, and very, very pretty, quite as
pretty as a frock, if not more so. Only it was _not_ a frock, and
Martha's word was law. She wouldn't let Jane wear her best frock, and
she refused to listen for a moment to Robert's suggestion that Jane
should wear her best petticoat and call it a dress.

"It's not respectable," she said. And when people say that, it's no use
anyone's saying anything. You'll find this out for yourselves some day.

So there was nothing for it but for Jane to mend her frock. The hole had
been torn the day before when she happened to tumble down in the High
Street of Rochester, just where a water-cart had passed on its silvery
way. She had grazed her knee, and her stocking was much more than
grazed, and her dress was cut by the same stone which had attended to
the knee and the stocking. Of course the others were not such sneaks as
to abandon a comrade in misfortune, so they all sat on the grass-plot
round the sun-dial, and Jane darned away for dear life. The Lamb was
still in the hands of Martha having its clothes changed, so conversation
was possible.

Anthea and Robert timidly tried to conceal their inmost thought, which
was that the Psammead was not to be trusted; but Cyril said--

"Speak out--say what you've got to say--I hate hinting, and 'don't
know,' and sneakish ways like that."

So then Robert said, as in honour bound, "Sneak yourself--Anthea and me
weren't so gold-fishy as you two were, so we got changed quicker, and
we've had time to think it over, and if you ask me"--

"I didn't ask you," said Jane, biting off a needleful of thread as she
had always been strictly forbidden to do. (Perhaps you don't know that
if you bite off ends of cotton and swallow them they wind tight round
your heart and kill you? My nurse told me this, and she told me also
about the earth going round the sun. Now what is one to believe--what
with nurses and science?)

"I don't care who asks or who doesn't," said Robert, "but Anthea and I
think the Sammyadd is a spiteful brute. If it can give us our wishes I
suppose it can give itself its own, and I feel almost sure it wishes
every time that our wishes shan't do us any good. Let's let the tiresome
beast alone, and just go and have a jolly good game of forts, on our
own, in the chalk-pit."

(You will remember that the happily-situated house where these children
were spending their holidays lay between a chalk-quarry and a
gravel-pit.)

Cyril and Jane were more hopeful--they generally were.

"I don't think the Sammyadd does it on purpose," Cyril said; "and, after
all, it _was_ silly to wish for boundless wealth. Fifty pounds in
two-shilling pieces would have been much more sensible. And wishing to
be beautiful as the day was simply donkeyish. I don't want to be
disagreeable, but it _was_. We must try to find a really useful wish,
and wish it."

Jane dropped her work and said--

"I think so too, it's too silly to have a chance like this and not use
it. I never heard of anyone else outside a book who had such a chance;
there must be simply heaps of things we could wish for that wouldn't
turn out Dead Sea fish, like these two things have. Do let's think hard
and wish something nice, so that we can have a real jolly day--what
there is left of it."

Jane darned away again like mad, for time was indeed getting on, and
everyone began to talk at once. If you had been there you could not
possibly have made head or tail of the talk, but these children were
used to talking "by fours," as soldiers march, and each of them could
say what it had to say quite comfortably, and listen to the agreeable
sound of its own voice, and at the same time have three-quarters of two
sharp ears to spare for listening to what the others said. That is an
easy example in multiplication of vulgar fractions, but, as I daresay
you can't do even that, I won't ask you to tell me whether 3/4 × 2 =
1-1/2, but I will ask you to believe me that this was the amount of ear
each child was able to lend to the others. Lending ears was common in
Roman times, as we learn from Shakespeare; but I fear I am getting too
instructive.

When the frock was darned, the start for the gravel-pit was delayed by
Martha's insisting on everybody's washing its hands--which was nonsense,
because nobody had been doing anything at all, except Jane, and how can
you get dirty doing nothing? That is a difficult question, and I cannot
answer it on paper. In real life I could very soon show you--or you me,
which is much more likely.

During the conversation in which the six ears were lent (there were four
children, so _that_ sum comes right), it had been decided that fifty
pounds in two-shilling pieces was the right wish to have. And the lucky
children, who could have anything in the wide world by just wishing for
it, hurriedly started for the gravel-pit to express their wishes to the
Psammead. Martha caught them at the gate, and insisted on their taking
the Baby with them.

[Illustration: The lucky children ... hurriedly started for the gravel
pit]

"Not want him indeed! Why, everybody 'ud want him, a duck! with all
their hearts they would; and you know you promised your ma to take him
out every blessed day," said Martha.

"I know we did," said Robert in gloom, "but I wish the Lamb wasn't quite
so young and small. It would be much better fun taking him out."

"He'll mend of his youngness with time," said Martha; "and as for
smallness, I don't think you'd fancy carrying of him any more, however
big he was. Besides he can walk a bit, bless his precious fat legs, a
ducky! He feels the benefit of the new-laid air, so he does, a pet!"

With this and a kiss, she plumped the Lamb into Anthea's arms, and went
back to make new pinafores on the sewing-machine. She was a rapid
performer on this instrument.

The Lamb laughed with pleasure, and said, "Walky wif Panty," and rode on
Robert's back with yells of joy, and tried to feed Jane with stones,
and altogether made himself so agreeable that nobody could long be sorry
that he was of the party.

The enthusiastic Jane even suggested that they should devote a week's
wishes to assuring the Baby's future, by asking such gifts for him as
the good fairies give to Infant Princes in proper fairy-tales, but
Anthea soberly reminded her that as the Sand-fairy's wishes only lasted
till sunset they could not ensure any benefit to the Baby's later years;
and Jane owned that it would be better to wish for fifty pounds in
two-shilling pieces, and buy the Lamb a three-pound fifteen
rocking-horse, like those in the big stores, with a part of the money.

It was settled that, as soon as they had wished for the money and got
it, they would get Mr. Crispin to drive them into Rochester again,
taking Martha with them if they could not get out of taking her. And
they would make a list of things they really wanted before they started.
Full of high hopes and excellent resolutions, they went round the safe
slow cart-road to the gravel-pits, and as they went in between the
mounds of gravel a sudden thought came to them, and would have turned
their ruddy cheeks pale if they had been children in a book. Being real
live children, it only made them stop and look at each other with rather
blank and silly expressions. For now they remembered that yesterday,
when they had asked the Psammead for boundless wealth, and it was
getting ready to fill the quarry with the minted gold of bright
guineas--millions of them--it had told the children to run along outside
the quarry for fear they should be buried alive in the heavy splendid
treasure. And they had run. And so it happened that they had not had
time to mark the spot where the Psammead was, with a ring of stones, as
before. And it was this thought that put such silly expressions on their
faces.

"Never mind," said the hopeful Jane, "we'll soon find him."

But this, though easily said, was hard in the doing. They looked and
they looked, and, though they found their seaside spades, nowhere could
they find the Sand-fairy.

At last they had to sit down and rest--not at all because they were
weary or disheartened, of course, but because the Lamb insisted on being
put down, and you cannot look very carefully after anything you may have
happened to lose in the sand if you have an active baby to look after at
the same time. Get someone to drop your best knife in the sand next time
you go to the seashore and then take your baby brother with you when you
go to look for it, and you will see that I am right.

The Lamb, as Martha had said, was feeling the benefit of the country
air, and he was as frisky as a sandhopper. The elder ones longed to go
on talking about the new wishes they would have when (or if) they found
the Psammead again. But the Lamb wished to enjoy himself.

He watched his opportunity and threw a handful of sand into Anthea's
face, and then suddenly burrowed his own head in the sand and waved his
fat legs in the air. Then of course the sand got into his eyes, as it
had into Anthea's, and he howled.

The thoughtful Robert had brought one solid brown bottle of ginger-beer
with him, relying on a thirst that had never yet failed him. This had to
be uncorked hurriedly--it was the only wet thing within reach, and it
was necessary to wash the sand out of the Lamb's eyes somehow. Of course
the ginger hurt horribly, and he howled more than ever. And, amid his
anguish of kicking, the bottle was upset and the beautiful ginger-beer
frothed out into the sand and was lost for ever.

It was then that Robert, usually a very patient brother, so far forgot
himself as to say--

"Anybody would want him, indeed! Only they don't; Martha doesn't, not
really, or she'd jolly well keep him with her. He's a little nuisance,
that's what he is. It's too bad. I only wish everybody _did_ want him
with all their hearts; we might get some peace in our lives."

The Lamb stopped howling now, because Jane had suddenly remembered that
there is only one safe way of taking things out of little children's
eyes, and that is with your own soft wet tongue. It is quite easy if you
love the Baby as much as you ought to do.

Then there was a little silence. Robert was not proud of himself for
having been so cross, and the others were not proud of him either. You
often notice that sort of silence when someone has said something it
ought not to--and everyone else holds its tongue and waits for the one
who oughtn't to have said it is sorry.

The silence was broken by a sigh--a breath suddenly let out. The
children's heads turned as if there had been a string tied to each nose,
and somebody had pulled all the strings at once.

And everyone saw the Sand-fairy sitting quite close to them, with the
expression which it used as a smile on its hairy face.

"Good-morning," it said; "I did that quite easily! Everyone wants him
now."

"It doesn't matter," said Robert sulkily, because he knew he had been
behaving rather like a pig. "No matter who wants him--there's no one
here to--anyhow."

"Ingratitude," said the Psammead, "is a dreadful vice."

"We're not ungrateful," Jane made haste to say, "but we didn't _really_
want that wish. Robert only just said it. Can't you take it back and
give us a new one?"

"No--I can't," the Sand-fairy said shortly; "chopping and changing--it's
not business. You ought to be careful what you _do_ wish. There was a
little boy once, he'd wished for a Plesiosaurus instead of an
Ichthyosaurus, because he was too lazy to remember the easy names of
everyday things, and his father had been very vexed with him, and had
made him go to bed before tea-time, and wouldn't let him go out in the
nice flint boat along with the other children,--it was the annual
school-treat next day,--and he came and flung himself down near me on
the morning of the treat, and he kicked his little prehistoric legs
about and said he wished he was dead. And of course then he was."

"How awful! said the children all together.

"Only till sunset, of course," the Psammead said; "still it was quite
enough for his father and mother. And he caught it when he woke up--I
tell you. He didn't turn to stone--I forget why--but there must have
been some reason. They didn't know being dead is only being asleep, and
you're bound to wake up somewhere or other, either where you go to sleep
or in some better place. You may be sure he caught it, giving them such
a turn. Why, he wasn't allowed to taste Megatherium for a month after
that. Nothing but oysters and periwinkles, and common things like that."

All the children were quite crushed by this terrible tale. They looked
at the Psammead in horror. Suddenly the Lamb perceived that something
brown and furry was near him.

"Poof, poof, poofy," he said, and made a grab.

[Illustration: "Poof, poof, poofy," he said, and made a grab]

"It's not a pussy," Anthea was beginning, when the Sand-fairy leaped
back.

"Oh, my left whisker!" it said; "don't let him touch me. He's wet."

Its fur stood on end with horror--and indeed a good deal of the
ginger-beer had been spilt on the blue smock of the Lamb.

The Psammead dug with its hands and feet, and vanished in an instant and
a whirl of sand.

The children marked the spot with a ring of stones.

"We may as well get along home," said Robert. "I'll say I'm sorry; but
anyway if it's no good it's no harm, and we know where the sandy thing
is for to-morrow."

The others were noble. No one reproached Robert at all. Cyril picked up
the Lamb, who was now quite himself again, and off they went by the safe
cart-road.

The cart-road from the gravel-pits joins the road almost directly.

At the gate into the road the party stopped to shift the Lamb from
Cyril's back to Robert's. And as they paused a very smart open carriage
came in sight, with a coachman and a groom on the box, and inside the
carriage a lady--very grand indeed, with a dress all white lace and
red ribbons and a parasol all red and white--and a white fluffy dog on
her lap with a red ribbon round its neck. She looked at the children,
and particularly at the Baby, and she smiled at him. The children were
used to this, for the Lamb was, as all the servants said, a "very taking
child." So they waved their hands politely to the lady and expected her
to drive on. But she did not. Instead she made the coachman stop. And
she beckoned to Cyril, and when he went up to the carriage she said--

"What a dear darling duck of a baby! Oh, I _should_ so like to adopt it!
Do you think its mother would mind?"

"She'd mind very much indeed," said Anthea shortly.

"Oh, but I should bring it up in luxury, you know. I am Lady Chittenden.
You must have seen my photograph in the illustrated papers. They call me
a Beauty, you know, but of course that's all nonsense. Anyway"--

She opened the carriage door and jumped out. She had the wonderfullest
red high-heeled shoes with silver buckles. "Let me hold him a minute,"
she said. And she took the Lamb and held him very awkwardly, as if she
was not used to babies.

Then suddenly she jumped into the carriage with the Lamb in her arms and
slammed the door, and said, "Drive on!"

The Lamb roared, the little white dog barked, and the coachman
hesitated.

"Drive on, I tell you!" cried the lady; and the coachman did, for, as he
said afterwards, it was as much as his place was worth not to.

The four children looked at each other, and then with one accord they
rushed after the carriage and held on behind. Down the dusty road went
the smart carriage, and after it, at double-quick time, ran the
twinkling legs of the Lamb's brothers and sisters.

[Illustration: At double-quick time, ran the twinkling legs of the
Lamb's brothers and sisters]

The Lamb howled louder and louder, but presently his howls changed by
slow degrees to hiccupy gurgles, and then all was still, and they knew
he had gone to sleep.

The carriage went on, and the eight feet that twinkled through the
dust were growing quite stiff and tired before the carriage stopped at
the lodge of a grand park. The children crouched down behind the
carriage, and the lady got out. She looked at the Baby as it lay on the
carriage seat, and hesitated.

"The darling--I won't disturb it," she said, and went into the lodge to
talk to the woman there about a setting of eggs that had not turned out
well.

The coachman and footman sprang from the box and bent over the sleeping
Lamb.

"Fine boy--wish he was mine," said the coachman.

"He wouldn't favour _you_ much," said the groom sourly; "too 'andsome."

The coachman pretended not to hear. He said--

"Wonder at her now--I do really! Hates kids. Got none of her own, and
can't abide other folkses'."

The children, crouched in the white dust under the carriage, exchanged
uncomfortable glances.

"Tell you what," the coachman went on firmly, "blowed if I don't hide
the little nipper in the hedge and tell her his brothers took 'im! Then
I'll come back for him afterwards."

"No, you don't," said the footman. "I've took to that kid so as never
was. If anyone's to have him, it's me--so there!"

"Stop your talk!" the coachman rejoined. "You don't want no kids, and,
if you did, one kid's the same as another to you. But I'm a married man
and a judge of breed. I knows a firstrate yearling when I sees him. I'm
a-goin' to 'ave him, an' least said soonest mended."

"I should 'a' thought," said the footman sneeringly, "you'd a'most
enough. What with Alfred, an' Albert, an' Louise, an' Victor Stanley,
and Helena Beatrice, and another"--

The coachman hit the footman in the chin--the footman hit the coachman
in the waist-coat--the next minute the two were fighting here and there,
in and out, up and down, and all over everywhere, and the little dog
jumped on the box of the carriage and began barking like mad.

[Illustration: The next minute the two were fighting]

Cyril, still crouching in the dust, waddled on bent legs to the side of
the carriage farthest from the battlefield. He unfastened the door of
the carriage--the two men were far too much occupied with their quarrel
to notice anything--took the Lamb in his arms, and, still stooping,
carried the sleeping baby a dozen yards along the road to where a stile
led into a wood. The others followed, and there among the hazels and
young oaks and sweet chestnuts, covered by high strong-scented
brake-fern, they all lay hidden till the angry voices of the men were
hushed at the angry voice of the red-and-white lady, and, after a long
and anxious search, the carriage at last drove away.

"My only hat!" said Cyril, drawing a deep breath as the sound of wheels
at last died away. "Everyone _does_ want him now--and no mistake! That
Sammyadd has done us again! Tricky brute! For any sake, let's get the
kid safe home."

So they peeped out, and finding on the right hand only lonely white
road, and nothing but lonely white road on the left, they took courage,
and the road, Anthea carrying the sleeping Lamb.

Adventures dogged their footsteps. A boy with a bundle of faggots on his
back dropped his bundle by the roadside and asked to look at the Baby,
and then offered to carry him; but Anthea was not to be caught that way
twice. They all walked on, but the boy followed, and Cyril and Robert
couldn't make him go away till they had more than once invited him to
smell their fists. Afterwards a little girl in a blue-and-white checked
pinafore actually followed them for a quarter of a mile crying for "the
precious Baby," and then she was only got rid of by threats of tying her
to a tree in the wood with all their pocket handkerchiefs. "So that
bears can come and eat you as soon as it gets dark," said Cyril
severely. Then she went off crying. It presently seemed wise, to the
brothers and sisters of the Baby who was wanted by everyone, to hide in
the hedge whenever they saw anyone coming, and thus they managed to
prevent the Lamb from arousing the inconvenient affection of a milkman,
a stone-breaker, and a man who drove a cart with a paraffin barrel at
the back of it. They were nearly home when the worst thing of all
happened. Turning a corner suddenly they came upon two vans, a tent, and
a company of gipsies encamped by the side of the road. The vans were
hung all round with wicker chairs and cradles, and flower-stands and
feather brushes. A lot of ragged children were industriously making
dust-pies in the road, two men lay on the grass smoking, and three women
were doing the family washing in an old red watering-can with the top
broken off.

In a moment every gipsy, men, women, and children, surrounded Anthea and
the Baby.

"Let me hold him, little lady," said one of the gipsy women, who had a
mahogany-coloured face and dust-coloured hair; "I won't hurt a hair of
his head, the little picture!"

"I'd rather not," said Anthea.

"Let _me_ have him," said the other woman, whose face was also of the
hue of mahogany, and her hair jet-black, in greasy curls. "I've nineteen
of my own, so I have"--

"No," said Anthea bravely, but her heart beat so that it nearly choked
her.

Then one of the men pushed forward.

"Swelp me if it ain't!" he cried, "my own long-lost cheild! Have he a
strawberry mark on his left ear? No? Then he's my own babby, stolen from
me in hinnocent hinfancy. 'And 'im over--and we'll not 'ave the law on
yer this time."

He snatched the Baby from Anthea, who turned scarlet and burst into
tears of pure rage.

[Illustration: He snatched the baby from Anthea]

The others were standing quite still; this was much the most terrible
thing that had ever happened to them. Even being taken up by the police
in Rochester was nothing to this. Cyril was quite white, and his hands
trembled a little, but he made a sign to the others to shut up. He was
silent a minute, thinking hard. Then he said--

"We don't want to keep him if he's yours. But you see he's used to us.
You shall have him if you want him"--

"No, no!" cried Anthea,--and Cyril glared at her.

"Of course we want him," said the women, trying to get the Baby out of
the man's arms. The Lamb howled loudly.

"Oh, he's hurt!" shrieked Anthea; and Cyril, in a savage undertone, bade
her "stop it!"

"You trust to me," he whispered. "Look here," he went on, "he's awfully
tiresome with people he doesn't know very well. Suppose we stay here a
bit till he gets used to you, and then when it's bedtime I give you my
word of honour we'll go away and let you keep him if you want to. And
then when we're gone you can decide which of you is to have him, as you
all want him so much."

"That's fair enough," said the man who was holding the Baby, trying to
loosen the red neckerchief which the Lamb had caught hold of and drawn
round his mahogany throat so tight that he could hardly breathe. The
gipsies whispered together, and Cyril took the chance to whisper too. He
said, "Sunset! we'll get away then."

And then his brothers and sisters were filled with wonder and admiration
at his having been so clever as to remember this.

"Oh, do let him come to us!" said Jane. "See, we'll sit down here and
take care of him for you till he gets used to you."

"What about dinner?" said Robert suddenly. The others looked at him with
scorn. "Fancy bothering about your beastly dinner when your br--I mean
when the Baby"--Jane whispered hotly. Robert carefully winked at her and
went on--

"You won't mind my just running home to get our dinner?" he said to the
gipsy; "I can bring it out here in a basket."

His brothers and sisters felt themselves very noble and despised him.
They did not know his thoughtful secret intention. But the gipsies did
in a minute.

"Oh yes!" they said; "and then fetch the police with a pack of lies
about it being your baby instead of ours! D'jever catch a weasel
asleep?" they asked.

"If you're hungry you can pick a bit along of us," said the light-haired
gipsy-woman, not unkindly. "Here Levi, that blessed kid'll howl all his
buttons off. Give him to the little lady, and let's see if they can't
get him used to us a bit."

So the Lamb was handed back; but the gipsies crowded so closely that he
could not possibly stop howling. Then the man with the red handkerchief
said--

"Here, Pharaoh, make up the fire; and you girls see to the pot. Give the
kid a chanst." So the gipsies, very much against their will, went off to
their work, and the children and the Lamb were left sitting on the
grass.

"He'll be all right at sunset," Jane whispered. "But, oh, it is awful!
Suppose they are frightfully angry when they come to their senses! They
might beat us, or leave us tied to trees, or something."

"No, they won't," Anthea said ("Oh, my Lamb, don't cry any more, it's
all right, Panty's got oo, duckie"); "they aren't unkind people, or they
wouldn't be going to give us any dinner."

"Dinner?" said Robert; "I won't touch their nasty dinner. It would choke
me!"

The others thought so too then. But when the dinner was ready--it turned
out to be supper, and happened between four and five--they were all glad
enough to take what they could get. It was boiled rabbit, with onions,
and some bird rather like a chicken, but stringier about its legs and
with a stronger taste. The Lamb had bread soaked in hot water and brown
sugar sprinkled on the top. He liked this very much, and consented to
let the two gipsy women feed him with it, as he sat on Anthea's lap. All
that long hot afternoon Robert and Cyril and Anthea and Jane had to keep
the Lamb amused and happy, while the gipsies looked eagerly on. By the
time the shadows grew long and black across the meadows he had really
"taken to" the woman with the light hair, and even consented to kiss
his hand to the children, and to stand up and bow, with his hand on his
chest--"like a gentleman"--to the two men. The whole gipsy camp was in
raptures with him, and his brothers and sisters could not help taking
some pleasure in showing off his accomplishments to an audience so
interested and enthusiastic. But they longed for sunset.

[Illustration: He consented to let the two gypsy women feed him]

"We're getting into the habit of longing for sunset," Cyril whispered.
"How I do wish we could wish something really sensible, that would be of
some use, so that we should be quite sorry when sunset came."

The shadows got longer and longer, and at last there were no separate
shadows any more, but one soft glowing shadow over everything; for the
sun was out of sight--behind the hill--but he had not really set yet.
The people who make the laws about lighting bicycle lamps are the people
who decide when the sun sets; she has to do it too, to the minute, or
they would know the reason why!

But the gipsies were getting impatient.

"Now, young uns," the red-handkerchief man said, "it's time you were
laying of your heads on your pillowses--so it is! The kid's all right
and friendly with us now--so you just hand him over and get home like
you said."

The women and children came crowding round the Lamb, arms were held out,
fingers snapped invitingly, friendly faces beaming with admiring smiles;
but all failed to tempt the loyal Lamb. He clung with arms and legs to
Jane, who happened to be holding him, and uttered the gloomiest roar of
the whole day.

"It's no good," the woman said, "hand the little poppet over, miss.
We'll soon quiet him."

And still the sun would not set.

"Tell her about how to put him to bed," whispered Cyril; "anything to
gain time--and be ready to bolt when the sun really does make up its
silly old mind to set."

"Yes, I'll hand him over in just one minute," Anthea began, talking very
fast,--"but do let me just tell you he has a warm bath every night and
cold in the morning, and he has a crockery rabbit to go into the warm
bath with him, and little Samuel saying his prayers in white china on a
red cushion for the cold bath; and he hates you to wash his ears, but
you must; and if you let the soap get into his eyes, the Lamb"--

"Lamb kyes," said he--he had stopped roaring to listen.

The woman laughed. "As if I hadn't never bath'd a babby!" she said.
"Come--give us a hold of him. Come to 'Melia, my precious"--

"G'way, ugsie!" replied the Lamb at once.

"Yes, but," Anthea went on, "about his meals; you really _must_ let me
tell you he has an apple or banana every morning, and bread and milk for
breakfast, and an egg for his tea sometimes, and"--

"I've brought up ten," said the black ringleted woman, "besides the
others. Come, miss, 'and 'im over--I can't bear it no longer. I just
must give him a hug."

"We ain't settled yet whose he's to be, Esther," said one of the men.

"It won't be you, Esther, with seven of 'em at your tail a'ready."

"I ain't so sure of that," said Esther's husband.

"And ain't I nobody, to have a say neither?" said the husband of 'Melia.

Zillah, the girl, said, "An' me? I'm a single girl--and no one but 'im
to look after--I ought to have him."

"Hold your tongue!"

"Shut your mouth!"

"Don't you show me no more of your imperence!"

Everyone was getting very angry. The dark gipsy faces were frowning and
anxious-looking. Suddenly a change swept over them, as if some invisible
sponge had wiped away these cross and anxious expressions, and left only
a blank.

The children saw that the sun really _had_ set. But they were afraid to
move. And the gipsies were feeling so muddled because of the invisible
sponge that had washed all the feelings of the last few hours out of
their hearts, that they could not say a word.

The children hardly dared to breathe. Suppose the gipsies, when they
recovered speech, should be furious to think how silly they had been all
day?

It was an awkward moment. Suddenly Anthea, greatly daring, held out the
Lamb to the red-handkerchief man.

"Here he is!" she said.

The man drew back. "I shouldn't like to deprive you, miss," he said
hoarsely.

"Anyone who likes can have my share of him," said the other man.

"After all, I've got enough of my own," said Esther.

"He's a nice little chap, though," said Amelia. She was the only one who
now looked affectionately at the whimpering Lamb.

Zillah said, "If I don't think I must have had a touch of the sun. _I_
don't want him."

"Then shall we take him away?" said Anthea.

"Well--suppose you do," said Pharaoh heartily, "and we'll say no more
about it!"

And with great haste all the gipsies began to be busy about their tents
for the night. All but Amelia. She went with the children as far as the
bend in the road--and there she said--

"Let me give him a kiss, miss,--I don't know what made us go for to
behave so silly. Us gipsies don't steal babies, whatever they may tell
you when you're naughty. We've enough of our own, mostly. But I've lost
all mine."

She leaned towards the Lamb; and he, looking in her eyes, unexpectedly
put up a grubby soft paw and stroked her face.

"Poor, poor!" said the Lamb. And he let the gipsy woman kiss him, and,
what is more, he kissed her brown cheek in return--a very nice kiss, as
all his kisses are, and not a wet one like some babies give. The gipsy
woman moved her finger about on his forehead as if she had been writing
something there, and the same with his chest and his hands and his
feet; then she said--

"May he be brave, and have the strong head to think with, and the strong
heart to love with, and the strong arms to work with, and the strong
feet to travel with, and always come safe home to his own." Then she
said something in a strange language no one could understand, and
suddenly added--

"Well, I must be saying 'so long'--and glad to have made your
acquaintance." And she turned and went back to her home--the tent by the
grassy roadside.

The children looked after her till she was out of sight. Then Robert
said, "How silly of her! Even sunset didn't put _her_ right. What rot
she talked!"

"Well," said Cyril, "if you ask me, I think it was rather decent of
her"--

"Decent?" said Anthea; "it was very nice indeed of her. I think she's a
dear"--

"She's just too frightfully nice for anything," said Jane.

And they went home--very late for tea and unspeakably late for dinner.
Martha scolded, of course. But the Lamb was safe.

"I say--it turned out we wanted the Lamb as much as anyone," said
Robert, later.

"Of course."

"But do you feel different about it now the sun's set?"

"_No_," said all the others together.

"Then it's lasted over sunset with us."

"No, it hasn't," Cyril explained. "The wish didn't do anything to _us_.
We always wanted him with all our hearts when we were our proper selves,
only we were all pigs this morning; especially you, Robert." Robert bore
this much with a strange calm.

"I certainly _thought_ I didn't want him this morning," said he.
"Perhaps I _was_ a pig. But everything looked so different when we
thought we were going to lose him."

And that, my dear children, is the moral of this chapter. I did not mean
it to have a moral, but morals are nasty forward beings, and will keep
putting in their oars where they are not wanted. And since the moral has
crept in, quite against my wishes, you might as well think of it next
time you feel piggy yourself and want to get rid of any of your brothers
and sisters. I hope this doesn't often happen, but I daresay it has
happened sometimes, even to you!




CHAPTER IV

WINGS


The next day was very wet--too wet to go out, and far too wet to think
of disturbing a Sand-fairy so sensitive to water that he still, after
thousands of years, felt the pain of once having his left whisker
wetted. It was a long day, and it was not till the afternoon that all
the children suddenly decided to write letters to their mother. It was
Robert who had the misfortune to upset the ink well--an unusually deep
and full one--straight into that part of Anthea's desk where she had
long pretended that an arrangement of mucilage and cardboard painted
with Indian ink was a secret drawer. It was not exactly Robert's fault;
it was only his misfortune that he chanced to be lifting the ink across
the desk just at the moment when Anthea had got it open, and that that
same moment should have been the one chosen by the Lamb to get under
the table and break his squeaking bird. There was a sharp convenient
wire inside the bird, and of course the Lamb ran the wire into Robert's
leg at once; and so, without anyone's meaning to do it the secret drawer
was flooded with ink. At the same time a stream was poured over Anthea's
half-finished letter.

So that her letter was something like this--

          "DARLING MOTHER,--I hope you are quite well, and I
          hope Granny is better. The other day we...."

Then came a flood of ink, and at the bottom these words in pencil--

          "It was not me upset the ink, but it took such a
          time clearing up, so no more as it is
          post-time.--From your loving daughter     "ANTHEA."

Robert's letter had not even been begun. He had been drawing a ship on
the blotting paper while he was trying to think of what to say. And of
course after the ink was upset he had to help Anthea to clean out her
desk, and he promised to make her another secret drawer, better than
the other. And she said, "Well, make it now." So it was post-time and
his letter wasn't done. And the secret drawer wasn't done either.

Cyril wrote a long letter, very fast, and then went to set a trap for
slugs that he had read about in the _Home-made Gardener_, and when it
was post-time the letter could not be found, and it was never found.
Perhaps the slugs ate it.

Jane's letter was the only one that went. She meant to tell her mother
all about the Psammead,--in fact they had all meant to do this,--but she
spent so long thinking how to spell the word that there was no time to
tell the story properly, and it is useless to tell a story unless you
_do_ tell it properly, so she had to be contented with this--

          "MY DEAR MOTHER DEAR,--We are all as good as we
          can, like you told us to, and the Lamb has a
          little cold, but Martha says it is nothing, only
          he upset the gold-fish into himself yesterday
          morning. When we were up at the sand-pit the other
          day we went round by the safe way where carts go,
          and we found  a"--

Half an hour went by before Jane felt quite sure that they could none of
them spell Psammead. And they could not find it in the dictionary
either, though they looked. Then Jane hastily finished her letter--

          "We found a strange thing, but it is nearly
          post-time, so no more at present from your little
          girl,

                                                   "JANE.

          "P.S.--If you could have a wish come true what
          would you have?"

Then the postman was heard blowing his horn, and Robert rushed out in
the rain to stop his cart and give him the letters. And that was how it
happened that, though all the children meant to tell their mother about
the Sand-fairy, somehow or other she never got to know. There were other
reasons why she never got to know, but these come later.

The next day Uncle Richard came and took them all to Maidstone in a
wagonette--all except the Lamb. Uncle Richard was the very best kind of
uncle. He bought them toys at Maidstone. He took them into a shop and
let them all choose exactly what they wanted, without any restrictions
about price, and no nonsense about things being instructive. It is very
wise to let children choose exactly what they like, because they are
very foolish and inexperienced, and sometimes they will choose a really
instructive thing without meaning to do so. This happened to Robert, who
chose, at the last moment, and in a great hurry, a box with pictures on
it of winged bulls with men's heads and winged men with eagles' heads.
He thought there would be animals inside, the same as on the box. When
he got it home it was a Sunday puzzle about ancient Nineveh! The others
chose in haste, and were happy at leisure. Cyril had a model engine, and
the girls had two dolls, as well as a china tea-set with forget-me-nots
on it, to be "between them." The boys' "between them" was bow and arrow.

Then Uncle Richard took them on the beautiful Medway in a boat, and then
they all had tea at a beautiful confectioner's and when they reached
home it was far too late to have any wishes that day.

They did not tell Uncle Richard anything about the Psammead. I do not
know why. And they do not know why. But I daresay you can guess.

The day after Uncle Richard had behaved so handsomely was a very hot day
indeed. The people who decide what the weather is to be, and put its
orders down for it in the newspapers every morning, said afterwards that
it was the hottest day there had been for years. They had ordered it to
be "warmer--some showers," and warmer it certainly was. In fact it was
so busy being warmer that it had no time to attend to the order about
showers, so there weren't any.

Have you ever been up at five o'clock on a fine summer morning? It is
very beautiful. The sunlight is pinky and yellowy, and all the grass and
trees are covered with dew-diamonds. And all the shadows go the opposite
way to the way they do in the evening, which is very interesting and
makes you feel as though you were in a new other world.

Anthea woke at five. She had made herself wake, and I must tell you how
it is done, even if it keeps you waiting for the story to go on.

You get into bed at night, and lie down quite flat on your little back,
with your hands straight down by your sides. Then you say "I _must_ wake
up at five" (or six, or seven, or eight, or nine, or whatever the time
is that you want), and as you say it you push your chin down on your
chest and then whack your head back on the pillow. And you do this as
many times as there are ones in the time you want to wake up at. (It is
quite an easy sum.) Of course everything depends on your really wanting
to get up at five (or six, or seven, or eight, or nine); if you don't
really want to, it's all of no use. But if you do--well, try it and see.
Of course in this, as in doing Latin proses or getting into mischief,
practice makes perfect.

Anthea was quite perfect.

At the very moment when she opened her eyes she heard the black-and-gold
clock down in the dining-room strike eleven. So she knew it was three
minutes to five. The black-and-gold clock always struck wrong, but it
was all right when you knew what it meant. It was like a person talking
a foreign language. If you know the language it is just as easy to
understand as English. And Anthea knew the clock language. She was very
sleepy, but she jumped out of bed and put her face and hands into a
basin of cold water. This is a fairy charm that prevents your wanting to
get back into bed again. Then she dressed, and folded up her night
dress. She did not tumble it together by the sleeves, but folded it by
the seams from the hem, and that will show you the kind of
well-brought-up little girl she was.

Then she took her shoes in her hand and crept softly down the stairs.
She opened the dining-room window and climbed out. It would have been
just as easy to go out by the door, but the window was more romantic,
and less likely to be noticed by Martha.

"I will always get up at five," she said to herself. "It was quite too
awfully pretty for anything."

Her heart was beating very fast, for she was carrying out a plan quite
her own. She could not be sure that it was a good plan, but she was
quite sure that it would not be any better if she were to tell the
others about it. And she had a feeling that, right or wrong, she would
rather go through with it alone. She put on her shoes under the iron
verandah, on the red-and-yellow shining tiles, and then she ran straight
to the sand-pit, and found the Psammead's place, and dug it out; it was
very cross indeed.

"It's too bad," it said, fluffing up its fur as pigeons do their
feathers at Christmas time. "The weather's arctic, and it's the middle
of the night."

"I'm so sorry," said Anthea gently, and she took off her white pinafore
and covered the Sand-fairy up with it, all but its head, its bat's ears,
and its eyes that were like a snail's eyes.

"Thank you," it said, "that's better. What's the wish this morning?"

"I don't know," she said; "that's just it. You see we've been very
unlucky, so far. I wanted to talk to you about it. But--would you mind
not giving me any wishes till after breakfast? It's so hard to talk to
anyone if they jump out at you with wishes you don't really want!"

"You shouldn't say you wish for things if you don't wish for them. In
the old days people almost always knew whether it was Megatherium or
Ichthyosaurus they really wanted for dinner."

"I'll try not to do so," said Anthea, "but I do wish"--

"Look out!" said the Psammead in a warning voice, and it began to blow
itself out.

"Oh, this isn't a magic wish--it's just--I should be so glad if you'd
not swell yourself out and nearly burst to give me anything just now.
Wait till the others are here."

"Well, well," it said indulgently, but it shivered.

"Would you," asked Anthea kindly--"would you like to come and sit on my
lap? You'd be warmer, and I could turn the skirt of my frock up around
you. I'd be very careful."

Anthea had never expected that it would, but it did.

"Thank you," it said; "you really are rather thoughtful." It crept on to
her lap and snuggled down, and she put her arms round it with a rather
frightened gentleness. "Now then!" it said.

"Well then," said Anthea, "everything we have wished has turned out
rather horrid. I wish you would advise us. You are so old, you must be
very wise."

"I was always generous from a child," said the Sand-fairy. "I've spent
the whole of my waking hours in giving. But one thing I won't
give--that's advice."

"You see," Anthea went on, "it's such a wonderful thing--such a
splendid, glorious chance. It's so good and kind and dear of you to give
us our wishes, and it seems such a pity it should all be wasted just
because we are too silly to know what to wish for."

Anthea had meant to say that--and she had not wanted to say it before
the others. It's one thing to say you're silly, and quite another to
say that other people are.

"Child," said the Sand-fairy sleepily, "I can only advise you to think
before you speak"--

"But I thought you never gave advice."

"That piece doesn't count," it said. "You'll never take it! Besides,
it's not original. It's in all the copy-books."

"But won't you just say if you think wings would be a silly wish?"

"Wings?" it said. "I should think you might do worse. Only, take care
you aren't flying high at sunset. There was a little Ninevite boy I
heard of once. He was one of King Sennacherib's sons, and a traveller
brought him a Psammead. He used to keep it in a box of sand on the
palace terrace. It was a dreadful degradation for one of us, of course;
still the boy _was_ the Assyrian King's son. And one day he wished for
wings and got them. But he forgot that they would turn into stone at
sunset, and when they did he fell on to one of the winged lions at the
top of his father's great staircase; and what with _his_ stone wings
and the lion's stone wings--well it's not a very pretty story! But I
believe the boy enjoyed himself very much till then."

"Tell me," said Anthea, "why don't our wishes turn into stone now? Why
do they just vanish?"

"_Autre temps autres moeurs_," said the creature.

"Is that the Ninevite language?" asked Anthea, who had learned no
foreign language at school except French.

"What I mean is," the Psammead went on, "that in the old days people
wished for good solid everyday gifts,--Mammoths and Pterodactyls and
things,--and those could be turned into stone as easy as not. But people
wish such high-flying fanciful things nowadays. How are you going to
turn being beautiful as the day, or being wanted by everybody, into
stone? You see it can't be done. And it would never do to have two
rules, so they simply vanish. If being beautiful as the day _could_ be
turned into stone it would last an awfully long time, you know--much
longer than you would. Just look at the Greek statues. It's just as
well as it is. Good-bye. I _am_ so sleepy."

It jumped off her lap--dug frantically, and vanished.

Anthea was late for breakfast. It was Robert who quietly poured a
spoonful of molasses down the Lamb's frock, so that he had to be taken
away and washed thoroughly directly after breakfast. And it was of
course a very naughty thing to do; yet it served two purposes--it
delighted the Lamb, who loved above all things to be completely sticky,
and it engaged Martha's attention so that the others could slip away to
the sand-pit without the Lamb.

They did it, and in the lane Anthea, breathless from the hurry of that
slipping, panted out--

"I want to propose we take turns to wish. Only, nobody's to have a wish
if the others don't think it's a nice wish. Do you agree?"

"Who's to have first wish?" asked Robert cautiously.

"Me, if you don't mind," said Anthea apologetically. "And I've thought
about it--and it's _wings_."

There was a silence. The others rather wanted to find fault, but it was
hard, because the word "wings" raised a flutter of joyous excitement in
every breast.

"Not so dusty," said Cyril generously; and Robert added, "Really,
Panther, you're not quite such a fool as you look."

Jane said, "I think it would be perfectly lovely. It's like a bright
dream of delirium."

They found the Sand-fairy easily. Anthea said--

"I wish we all had beautiful wings to fly with."

The Sand-fairy blew himself out, and next moment each child felt a funny
feeling, half heaviness and half lightness, on its shoulders. The
Psammead put its head on one side and turned its snail eyes from one
side to the other.

[Illustration: The Sand-fairy blew himself out]

"Not so bad," it said dreamily. "But really, Robert, you're not quite
such an angel as you look." Robert almost blushed.

The wings were very big, and more beautiful than you can possibly
imagine--for they were soft and smooth, and every feather lay neatly in
its place. And the feathers were of the most lovely mixed changing
colors, like the rainbow, or iridescent glass, or the beautiful scum
that sometimes floats on water that is not at all nice to drink.

"Oh--but how can we fly?" Jane said, standing anxiously first on one
foot and then on the other.

"Look out!" said Cyril; "you're treading on my wing."

"Does it hurt?" asked Anthea with interest; but no one answered, for
Robert had spread his wings and jumped up, and now he was slowly rising
in the air. He looked very awkward in his knickerbocker suit--his boots
in particular hung helplessly, and seemed much larger than when he was
standing in them. But the others cared but little how he looked,--or how
they looked, for that matter. For now they all spread out their wings
and rose in the air. Of course you all know what flying feels like,
because everyone has dreamed about flying, and is seems so beautifully
easy--only, you can never remember how you did it; and as a rule you
have to do it without wings, in your dreams, which is more clever and
uncommon, but not so easy to remember the rule for. Now the four
children rose flapping from the ground, and you can't think how good the
air felt as it ran against their faces. Their wings were tremendously
wide when they were spread out, and they had to fly quite a long way
apart so as not to get in each other's way. But little things like this
are easily learned.

All the words in the English Dictionary, and in the Greek Lexicon as
well, are, I find, of no use at all to tell you exactly what it feels
like to be flying, so I will not try. But I will say that to look _down_
on the fields and woods instead of _along_ at them, is something like
looking at a beautiful live map, where, instead of silly colors on
paper, you have real moving sunny woods and green fields laid out one
after the other. As Cyril said, and I can't think where he got hold of
such a strange expression, "It does you a fair treat!" It was most
wonderful and more like real magic than any wish the children had had
yet. They flapped and flew and sailed on their great rainbow wings,
between green earth and blue sky; and they flew over Rochester and then
swerved round towards Maidstone, and presently they all began to feel
extremely hungry. Curiously enough, this happened when they were flying
rather low, and just as they were crossing an orchard where some early
plums shone red and ripe.

[Illustration: They flew over Rochester]

They paused on their wings. I cannot explain to you how this is done,
but it is something like treading water when you are swimming, and hawks
do it extremely well.

"Yes, I daresay," said Cyril, though no one had spoken. "But stealing is
stealing even if you've got wings."

"Do you really think so?" said Jane briskly. "If you've got wings you're
a bird, and no one minds birds breaking the commandments. At least,
they may _mind_, but the birds always do it, and no one scolds them or
sends them to prison."

It was not so easy to perch on a plum-tree as you might think, because
the rainbow wings were so _very_ large; but somehow they all managed to
do it, and the plums were certainly very sweet and juicy.

Fortunately, it was not till they had all had quite as many plums as
were good for them that they saw a stout man, who looked exactly as
though he owned the plum-trees, come hurrying through the orchard gate
with a thick stick, and with one accord they disentangled their wings
from the plum-laden branches and began to fly.

The man stopped short, with his mouth open. For he had seen the boughs
of his trees moving and twitching, and he had said to himself, "Them
young varmint--at it again!" And he had come out at once, for the lads
of the village had taught him in past seasons that plums want looking
after. But when he saw the rainbow wings flutter up out of the
plum-tree he felt that he must have gone quite mad, and he did not like
the feeling at all. And when Anthea looked down and saw his mouth go
slowly open, and stay so, and his face become green and mauve in
patches, she called out--

"Don't be frightened," and felt hastily in her pocket for a
threepenny-bit with a hole in it, which she had meant to hang on a
ribbon round her neck, for luck. She hovered round the unfortunate
plum-owner, and said, "We have had some of your plums; we thought it
wasn't stealing, but now I am not so sure. So here's some money to pay
for them."

She swooped down toward the terror-stricken grower of plums, and slipped
the coin into the pocket of his jacket, and in a few flaps she had
rejoined the others.

The farmer sat down on the grass, suddenly and heavily.

[Illustration: The farmer sat down on the grass suddenly and heavily]

"Well--I'm blessed!" he said. "This here is what they call delusions, I
suppose. But this here threepenny"--he had pulled it out and bitten
it,--"_that's_ real enough. Well, from this day forth I'll be a better
man. It's the kind of thing to sober a chap for life, this is. I'm glad
it was only wings, though. I'd rather see the birds as aren't there, and
couldn't be, even if they pretend to talk, than some things as I could
name."

He got up slowly and heavily, and went indoors, and he was so nice to
his wife that day that she felt quite happy, and said to herself, "Law,
whatever have a-come to the man!" and smartened herself up and put a
blue ribbon bow at the place where her collar fastened on, and looked so
pretty that he was kinder than ever. So perhaps the winged children
really did do one good thing that day. If so, it was the only one; for
really there is nothing like wings for getting you into trouble. But, on
the other hand, if you are in trouble, there is nothing like wings for
getting you out of it.

This was the case in the matter of the fierce dog who sprang out at them
when they had folded up their wings as small as possible and were going
up to a farm door to ask for a crust of bread and cheese, for in
spite of the plums they were soon just as hungry as ever again.

Now there is no doubt whatever that, if the four had been ordinary
wingless children, that black and fierce dog would have had a good bite
out of the brown-stockinged leg of Robert, who was the nearest. But at
its first growl there was a flutter of wings, and the dog was left to
strain at his chain and stand on his hind-legs as if he were trying to
fly too.

They tried several other farms, but at those where there were no dogs
the people were far too frightened to do anything but scream; and at
last, when it was nearly four o'clock, and their wings were getting
miserably stiff and tired, they alighted on a church-tower and held a
council of war.

"We can't possibly fly all the way home without dinner _or_ tea," said
Robert with desperate decision.

"And nobody will give us any dinner, or even lunch, let alone tea," said
Cyril.

"Perhaps the clergyman here might," suggested Anthea. "He must know all
about angels"--

"Anybody could see we're not that," said Jane. "Look at Robert's boots
and Squirrel's plaid necktie."

"Well," said Cyril firmly, "if the country you're in won't _sell_
provisions, you _take_ them. In wars I mean. I'm quite certain you do.
And even in other stories no good brother would allow his little sisters
to starve in the midst of plenty."

"Plenty?" repeated Robert hungrily; and the others looked vaguely round
the bare leads of the church-tower, and murmured, "In the midst of?"

"Yes," said Cyril impressively. "There is a larder window at the side of
the clergyman's house, and I saw things to eat inside--custard pudding
and cold chicken and tongue--and pies--and jam. It's rather a high
window--but with wings"--

"How clever of you!" said Jane.

"Not at all," said Cyril modestly; "any born general--Napoleon or the
Duke of Marlborough--would have seen it just the same as I did."

"It seems very wrong," said Anthea.

"Nonsense," said Cyril. "What was it Sir Philip Sidney said when the
soldier wouldn't give him a drink?--'My necessity is greater than his.'"

"We'll club together our money, though, and leave it to pay for the
things, won't we?" Anthea was persuasive, and very nearly in tears,
because it is most trying to feel enormously hungry and unspeakably
sinful at one and the same time.

"Some of it," was the cautious reply.

Everyone now turned out its pockets on the lead roof of the tower, where
visitors for the last hundred and fifty years had cut their own and
their sweethearts' initials with penknives in the soft lead. There was
five-and-seven-pence halfpenny altogether, and even the upright Anthea
admitted that that was too much to pay for four people's dinners. Robert
said he thought eighteenpence.

[Illustration: Every one now turned out his pockets]

And half-a-crown was finally agreed to be "handsome."

So Anthea wrote on the back of her last term's report, which happened to
be in her pocket, and from which she first tore her own name and that of
the school, the following letter:--

          "DEAR REVEREND CLERGYMAN,--We are very hungry
          indeed because of having to fly all day, and we
          think it is not stealing when you are starving to
          death. We are afraid to ask you for fear you
          should say 'No,' because of course you know about
          angels, but you would not think we were angels. We
          will only take the necessities of life, and no
          pudding or pie, to show you it is not grediness
          but true starvation that makes us make your larder
          stand and deliver. But we are not highwaymen by
          trade."

"Cut it short," said the others with one accord. And Anthea hastily
added--

          "Our intentions are quite honourable if you only
          knew. And here is half-a-crown to show we are
          sinseer and grateful.

          "Thank you for your kind hospitality.

                                          "FROM US FOUR."

The half-crown was wrapped in this letter, and all the children felt
that when the clergyman had read it he would understand everything, as
well as anyone could who had not even seen the wings.

"Now," said Cyril, "of course there's some risk; we'd better fly
straight down the other side of the tower and then flutter low across
the churchyard and in through the shrubbery. There doesn't seem to be
anyone about. But you never know. The window looks out into the
shrubbery. It is embowered in foliage, like a window in a story. I'll go
in and get the things. Robert and Anthea can take them as I hand them
out through the window; and Jane can keep watch,--her eyes are
sharp,--and whistle if she sees anyone about. Shut up, Robert! she can
whistle quite well enough for that, anyway. It ought not to be a very
good whistle--it'll sound more natural and birdlike. Now then--off we
go!"

I cannot pretend that stealing is right. I can only say that on this
occasion it did not look like stealing to the hungry four, but appeared
in the light of a fair and reasonable business transaction. They had
never happened to learn that a tongue,--hardly cut into,--a chicken and
a half, a loaf of bread, and a syphon of soda-water cannot be bought in
the stores for half-a-crown. These were the necessaries of life, which
Cyril handed out of the larder window when, quite unobserved and without
hindrance or adventure, he had led the others to that happy spot. He
felt that to refrain from jam, apple pie, cake, and mixed candied peel,
was a really heroic act--and I agree with him. He was also proud of not
taking the custard pudding,--and there I think he was wrong,--because if
he had taken it there would have been a difficulty about returning the
dish; no one, however starving, has a right to steal china pie-dishes
with little pink flowers on them. The soda-water syphon was different.
They could not do without something to drink, and as the maker's name
was on it they felt sure it would be returned to him wherever they might
leave it. If they had time they would take it back themselves. The
man appeared to live in Rochester, which would not be much out of their
way home.

[Illustration: These were the necessaries of life]

Everything was carried up to the top of the tower, and laid down on a
sheet of kitchen paper which Cyril had found on the top shelf of the
larder. As he unfolded it, Anthea said, "I don't think _that's_ a
necessity of life."

"Yes, it is," said he. "We must put the things down somewhere to cut
them up; and I heard father say the other day people got diseases from
germans in rain-water. Now there must be lots of rain-water here,--and
when it dries up the germans are left, and they'd get into the things,
and we should all die of scarlet fever."

"What are germans?"

"Little waggly things you see with microscopes," said Cyril, with a
scientific air. "They give you every illness you can think of. I'm sure
the paper was a necessary, just as much as the bread and meat and water.
Now then! Oh, I'm hungry!"

I do not wish to describe the picnic party on the top of the tower. You
can imagine well enough what it is like to carve a chicken and a tongue
with a knife that has only one blade and that snapped off short about
half-way down. But it was done. Eating with your fingers is greasy and
difficult--and paper dishes soon get to look very spotty and horrid. But
one thing you _can't_ imagine, and that is how soda-water behaves when
you try to drink it straight out of a syphon--especially a quite full
one. But if imagination will not help you, experience will, and you can
easily try it for yourself if you can get a grown-up to give you the
syphon. If you want to have a really thorough experience, put the tube
in your mouth and press the handle very suddenly and very hard. You had
better do it when you are alone--and out of doors is best for this
experiment.

However you eat them, tongue and chicken and new bread are very good
things, and no one minds being sprinkled a little with soda-water on a
really fine hot day. So that everyone enjoyed the dinner very much
indeed, and everyone ate as much as it possibly could: first, because it
was extremely hungry; and secondly, because, as I said, tongue and
chicken and new bread are very nice.

Now, I daresay you will have noticed that if you have to wait for your
dinner till long after the proper time, and then eat a great deal more
dinner than usual, and sit in the hot sun on the top of a
church-tower--or even anywhere else--you become soon and strangely
sleepy. Now Anthea and Jane and Cyril and Robert were very like you in
many ways, and when they had eaten all they could, and drunk all there
was, they became sleepy, strangely and soon--especially Anthea, because
she had gotten up so early.

[Illustration: The children were fast asleep]

One by one they left off talking and leaned back, and before it was a
quarter of an hour after dinner they had all curled round and tucked
themselves up under their large soft warm wings and were fast asleep.
And the sun was sinking slowly in the west. (I must say it was in the
west, because it is usual in books to say so, for fear careless people
should think it was setting in the east. In point of fact, it was not
exactly in the west either--but that's near enough.) The sun, I repeat,
was sinking slowly in the west, and the children slept warmly and
happily on--for wings are cosier than eider-down quilts to sleep under.
The shadow of the church-tower fell across the churchyard, and across
the Vicarage, and across the field beyond; and presently there were no
more shadows, and the sun had set, and the wings were gone. And still
the children slept. But not for long. Twilight is very beautiful, but it
is chilly; and you know, however sleepy you are, you wake up soon enough
if your brother or sister happens to be up first and pulls your blankets
off you. The four wingless children shivered and woke. And there they
were,--on the top of a church-tower in the dusky twilight, with blue
stars coming out by ones and twos and tens and twenties over their
heads,--miles away from home, with three shillings and three-halfpence
in their pockets, and a doubtful act about the necessities of life to
be accounted for if anyone found them with the soda-water syphon.

They looked at each other. Cyril spoke first, picking up the syphon--

"We'd better get along down and get rid of this beastly thing. It's dark
enough to leave it on the clergyman's doorstep, I should think. Come
on."

There was a little turret at the corner of the tower, and the little
turret had a door in it. They had noticed this when they were eating,
but had not explored it, as you would have done in their place. Because,
of course, when you have wings and can explore the whole sky, doors seem
hardly worth exploring.

Now they turned towards it.

"Of course," said Cyril "this is the way down."

It was. But the door was locked on the inside!

And the world was growing darker and darker. And they were miles from
home. And there was the soda-water syphon.

I shall not tell you whether anyone cried, nor, if so, how many cried,
nor who cried. You will be better employed in making up your minds what
you would have done if you had been in their place.




CHAPTER V

NO WINGS


Whether anyone cried or not, there was certainly an interval during
which none of the party was quite itself. When they grew calmer, Anthea
put her handkerchief in her pocket and her arm round Jane, and said--

"It can't be for more than one night. We can signal with our
handkerchiefs in the morning. They'll be dry then. And someone will come
up and let us out"--

"And find the syphon," said Cyril gloomily; "and we shall be sent to
prison for stealing"--

"You said it wasn't stealing. You said you were sure it wasn't."

"I'm not sure _now_" said Cyril shortly.

"Let's throw the thing away among the trees," said Robert, "then no one
can do anything to us."

"Oh yes,"--Cyril's laugh was not a light-hearted one,--"and hit some
chap on the head, and be murderers as well as--as the other thing."

"But we can't stay up here all night," said Jane; "and I want my tea."

"You _can't_ want your tea," said Robert; "you've only just had your
dinner."

"But I _do_ want it," she said; "especially when you begin talking about
stopping up here all night. Oh, Panther--I want to go home! I want to go
home!"

"Hush, hush," Anthea said. "Don't, dear. It'll be all right, somehow.
Don't, don't"--

"Let her cry," said Robert desperately; "if she howls loud enough,
someone may hear and come and let us out."

"And see the soda-water thing," said Anthea swiftly. "Robert, don't be a
brute. Oh, Jane, do try to be a man! It's just the same for all of us."

Jane did try to "be a man"--and reduced her howls to sniffs.

There was a pause. Then Cyril said slowly, "Look here. We must risk that
syphon. I'll button it up inside my jacket--perhaps no one will notice
it. You others keep well in front of me. There are lights in the
clergyman's house. They've not gone to bed yet. We must just yell as
loud as ever we can. Now all scream when I say three. Robert, you do the
yell like a railway engine, and I'll do the coo-ee like father's. The
girls can do as they please. One, two, three!"

A four-fold yell rent the silent peace of the evening, and a maid at one
of the Vicarage windows paused with her hand on the blind-cord.

"One, two, three!" Another yell, piercing and complex, startled the owls
and starlings to a flutter of feathers in the belfry below. The maid
flew from the Vicarage window and ran down the Vicarage stairs and into
the Vicarage kitchen, and fainted as soon as she had explained to the
man-servant and the cook and the cook's cousin that she had seen a
ghost. It was quite untrue, of course, but I suppose the girl's nerves
were a little upset by the yelling.

"One, two, three!" The Vicar was on his doorstep by this time, and there
was no mistaking the yell that greeted him.

"Goodness me," he said to his wife, "my dear, someone's being murdered
in the church! Give me my hat and a thick stick, and tell Andrew to come
after me. I expect it's the lunatic who stole the tongue."

The children had seen the flash of light when the Vicar opened his front
door. They had seen his dark form on his doorstep, and they had paused
for breath, and also to see what he would do.

When he turned back for his hat, Cyril said hastily--

"He thinks he only fancied he heard something. You don't half yell! Now!
One, two, three!"

It was certainly a whole yell this time, and the Vicar's wife flung her
arms round her husband and screamed a feeble echo of it.

"You shan't go!" she said, "not alone. Jessie!"--the maid unfainted and
came out of the kitchen,--"send Andrew at once. There's a dangerous
lunatic in the church, and he must go immediately and catch him."

"I expect he _will_ catch it too," said Jessie to herself as she went
through the kitchen door. "Here, Andrew," she said, "there's someone
screaming like mad in the church, and the missus says you're to go along
and catch it."

"Not alone, I don't," said Andrew in low firm tones. To his master he
merely said, "Yis sir."

"You heard those screams?"

"I did think I noticed a sort of something," said Andrew.

"Well, come on, then," said the Vicar. "My dear, I _must_ go!" He pushed
her gently into the sitting-room, banged the door, and rushed out,
dragging Andrew by the arm.

A volley of yells greeted them. Then as it died into silence Andrew
shouted, "Hullo, you there! Did you call?"

"Yes," shouted four far-away voices.

"They seem to be in the air," said the Vicar. "Very remarkable."

"Where are you?" shouted Andrew; and Cyril replied in his deepest
voice, very slow and loud--

"CHURCH! TOWER! TOP!"

"Come down, then!" said Andrew; and the same voice replied--

"_Can't! Door locked!_"

"My goodness!" said the Vicar. "Andrew, fetch the stable lantern.
Perhaps it would be as well to fetch another man from the village."

"With the rest of the gang about, very likely. No, sir; if this 'ere
ain't a trap--well, may I never! There's cook's cousin at the back door
now. He's a keeper, sir, and used to dealing with vicious characters.
And he's got his gun, sir."

"Hullo there!" shouted Cyril from the church-tower; "come up and let us
out."

"We're a-coming," said Andrew. "I'm a-going to get a policeman and a
gun."

"Andrew, Andrew," said the Vicar, "that's not the truth."

"It's near enough, sir, for the likes of them."

So Andrew fetched the lantern and the cook's cousin; and the Vicar's
wife begged them all to be very careful.

They went across the churchyard--it was quite dark now--and as they went
they talked. The Vicar was certain a lunatic was on the
church-tower--the one who had written the mad letter, and taken the cold
tongue and things. Andrew thought it was a "trap"; the cook's cousin
alone was calm. "Great cry, little wool," said he; "dangerous chaps is
quieter." He was not at all afraid. But then he had a gun. That was why
he was asked to lead the way up the worn, steep, dark steps of the
church-tower. He did lead the way, with the lantern in one hand and the
gun in the other. Andrew went next. He pretended afterwards that this
was because he was braver than his master, but really it was because he
thought of traps and he did not like the idea of being behind the others
for fear someone should come softly up behind him and catch hold of his
legs in the dark. They went on and on, and round and round the little
corkscrew staircase--then through the bell-ringers' loft, where the
bell-ropes hung with soft furry ends like giant caterpillars--then up
another stair into the belfry, where the big quiet bells are--and then
on up a ladder with broad steps--and then up a little stone stair. And
at the top of that there was a little door. And the door was bolted on
the stair side.

The cook's cousin, who was a gamekeeper, kicked at the door, and said--

"Hullo, you there!"

The children were holding on to each other on the other side of the
door, and trembling with anxiousness--and very hoarse with their howls.
They could hardly speak, but Cyril managed to reply huskily--

"Hullo, you there!"

"How did you get up there?"

It was no use saying "We flew up," so Cyril said--

"We got up--and then we found the door was locked and we couldn't get
down. Let us out--do."

"How many of you are there?" asked the keeper.

"Only four," said Cyril.

"Are you armed?"

"Are we what?"

"I've got my gun handy--so you'd best not try any tricks," said the
keeper. "If we open the door, will you promise to come quietly down, and
no nonsense?"

"Yes--oh YES!" said all the children together.

"Bless me," said the Vicar, "surely that was a female voice?"

"Shall I open the door, sir?" said the keeper. Andrew went down a few
steps, "to leave room for the others" he said afterwards.

"Yes," said the Vicar, "open the door. Remember," he said through the
keyhole, "we have come to release you. You will keep your promise to
refrain from violence?"

"How this bolt do stick," said the keeper; "anyone 'ud think it hadn't
been drawed for half a year." As a matter of fact it hadn't.

When all the bolts were drawn, the keeper spoke deep-chested words
through the keyhole.

[Illustration: The keeper spoke deep-chested words through the keyhole]

"I don't open," said he, "till you've gone over to the other side of the
tower. And if one of you comes at me I fire. Now!"

"We're all over on the other side," said the voices.

The keeper felt pleased with himself, and owned himself a bold man when
he threw open that door, and, stepping out into the leads, flashed the
full light of the stable lantern on the group of desperadoes standing
against the parapet on the other side of the tower.

He lowered his gun, and he nearly dropped the lantern.

"So help me," he cried, "if they ain't a pack of kiddies!"

The Vicar now advanced.

"How did you come here?" he asked severely. "Tell me at once."

"Oh, take us down," said Jane, catching at his coat, "and we'll tell you
anything you like. You won't believe us, but it doesn't matter. Oh, take
us down!"

The others crowded round him, with the same entreaty. All but Cyril.
He had enough to do with the soda-water syphon, which would keep
slipping down under his jacket. It needed both hands to keep it steady
in its place.

But he said, standing as far out of the lantern light as possible--

"Please do take us down."

So they were taken down. It is no joke to go down a strange church-tower
in the dark, but the keeper helped them--only, Cyril had to be
independent because of the soda-water syphon. It would keep trying to
get away. Half-way down the ladder it all but escaped. Cyril just caught
it by its spout, and as nearly as possible lost his footing. He was
trembling and pale when at last they reached the bottom of the winding
stair and stepped out on to the stones of the church-porch.

Then suddenly the keeper caught Cyril and Robert each by an arm.

"You bring along the gells, sir," said he; "you and Andrew can manage
them."

"Let go!" said Cyril; "we aren't running away. We haven't hurt your old
church. Leave go!"

"You just come along," said the keeper; and Cyril dared not oppose him
with violence, because just then the syphon began to slip again.

So they were marched into the Vicarage study, and the Vicar's wife came
rushing in.

"Oh, William, _are_ you safe?" she cried.

Robert hastened to allay her anxiety.

"Yes," he said, "he's quite safe. We haven't hurt them at all. And
please, we're very late, and they'll be anxious at home. Could you send
us home in your carriage?"

"Or perhaps there's a hotel near where we could get a carriage," said
Anthea. "Martha will be very anxious as it is."

The Vicar had sunk into a chair, overcome by emotion and amazement.

Cyril had also sat down, and was leaning forward with his elbows on his
knees because of the soda-water syphon.

"But how did you come to be locked up in the church-tower?" asked the
Vicar.

"We went up," said Robert slowly, "and we were tired, and we all went to
sleep, and when we woke up we found the door was locked, so we yelled."

"I should think you did!" said the Vicar's wife. "Frightening everybody
out of their wits like this! You ought to be ashamed of yourselves."

"We _are_," said Jane gently.

"But who locked the door?" asked the Vicar.

"I don't know at all," said Robert, with perfect truth. "Do please send
us home."

"Well, really," said the Vicar, "I suppose we'd better. Andrew, put the
horse to, and you can take them home."

"Not alone, I don't," said Andrew to himself.

And the Vicar went on, "let this be a lesson to you"---- He went on
talking, and the children listened miserably. But the keeper was not
listening. He was looking at the unfortunate Cyril. He knew all about
poachers, of course, so he knew how people look when they're hiding
something. The Vicar had just got to the part about trying to grow up
to be a blessing to your parents, and not a trouble and disgrace, when
the keeper suddenly said--

"Arst him what he's got there under his jacket;" and Cyril knew that
concealment was at an end. So he stood up, and squared his shoulders and
tried to look noble, like the boys in books that no one can look in the
face of and doubt that they come of brave and noble families, and will
be faithful to the death, and he pulled out the syphon and said--

"Well, there you are, then."

There was silence. Cyril went on--there was nothing else for it--

"Yes, we took this out of your larder, and some chicken and tongue and
bread. We were very hungry, and we didn't take the custard or jam. We
only took bread and meat and water,--and we couldn't help its being soda
kind,--just the necessaries of life; and we left half-a-crown to pay for
it, and we left a letter. And we're very sorry. And my father will pay a
fine and anything you like, but don't send us to prison. Mother would
be so vexed. You know what you said about not being a disgrace. Well,
don't you go and do it to us--that's all! We're as sorry as we can be.
There!"

"However did you get up to the larder window?" said Mrs. Vicar.

"I can't tell you that," said Cyril firmly.

"Is this the whole truth you've been telling me?" asked the clergyman.

"No," answered Jane suddenly; "it's all true, but it's not the whole
truth. We can't tell you that. It's no good asking. Oh, do forgive us
and take us home!" She ran to the Vicar's wife and threw her arms round
her. The Vicar's wife put her arms round Jane, and the keeper whispered
behind his hand to the Vicar--

"They're all right, sir--I expect it's a pal they're standing by.
Someone put 'em up to it, and they won't peach. Game little kids."

"Tell me," said the Vicar kindly, "are you screening someone else? Had
anyone else anything to do with this?"

"Yes," said Anthea, thinking of the Psammead; "but it wasn't their
fault."

"Very well, my dears," said the Vicar, "then let's say no more about it.
Only just tell us why you wrote such an odd letter."

"I don't know," said Cyril. "You see, Anthea wrote it in such a hurry,
and it really didn't seem like stealing then. But afterwards, when we
found we couldn't get down off the church-tower, it seemed just exactly
like it. We are all very sorry"--

"Say no more about it," said the Vicar's wife; "but another time just
think before you take other people's tongues. Now--some cake and milk
before you go home?"

When Andrew came to say that the horse was put to, and was he expected
to be led alone into the trap that he had plainly seen from the first,
he found the children eating cake and drinking milk and laughing at the
Vicar's jokes. Jane was sitting on the Vicar's wife's lap.

So you see they got off better than they deserved.

The gamekeeper, who was the cook's cousin, asked leave to drive home
with them, and Andrew was only too glad to have someone to protect him
from that trap he was so certain of.

When the wagonette reached their own house, between the chalk-quarry and
the gravel-pit, the children were very sleepy, but they felt that they
and the keeper were friends for life.

Andrew dumped the children down at the iron gate without a word.

"You get along home," said the Vicarage cook's cousin, who was a
gamekeeper. "I'll get me home on shanks' mare."

So Andrew had to drive off alone, which he did not like at all, and it
was the keeper that was cousin to the Vicarage cook who went with the
children to the door, and, when they had been swept to bed in a
whirlwind of reproaches, remained to explain to Martha and the cook and
the housemaid exactly what had happened. He explained so well that
Martha was quite amicable the next morning.

After that he often used to come over and see Martha, and in the
end--but that is another story, as dear Mr. Kipling says.

Martha was obliged to stick to what she had said the night before about
keeping the children indoors the next day for a punishment. But she
wasn't at all ugly about it, and agreed to let Robert go out for half an
hour to get something he particularly wanted.

This, of course, was the day's wish.

Robert rushed to the gravel-pit, found the Psammead, and presently
wished for--

But that, too, is another story.




CHAPTER VI

A CASTLE AND NO DINNER


The others were to be kept in as a punishment for the misfortunes of the
day before. Of course Martha thought it was naughtiness, and not
misfortune--so you must not blame her. She only thought she was doing
her duty. You know, grown-up people often say they do not like to punish
you, and that they only do it for your own good, and that it hurts them
as much as it hurts you--and this is really very often the truth.

Martha certainly hated having to punish the children quite as much as
they hated to be punished. For one thing, she knew what a noise there
would be in the house all day. And she had other reasons.

"I declare," she said to the cook, "it seems almost a shame keeping of
them indoors this lovely day; but they are that audacious, they'll be
walking in with their heads knocked off some of these days, if I don't
put my foot down. You make them a cake for tea to-morrow, dear. And
we'll have Baby along of us soon as we've got a bit forrard with our
work. Then they can have a good romp with him, out of the way. Now,
Eliza, come, get on with them beds. Here's ten o'clock nearly, and no
rabbits caught!"

People say that in Kent when they mean "and no work done."

So all the others were kept in, but Robert, as I have said, was allowed
to go out for half an hour to get something they all wanted. And that,
of course, was the day's wish.

He had no difficulty in finding the Sand-fairy, for the day was already
so hot that it had actually, for the first time, come out of its own
accord, and was sitting in a sort of pool of soft sand, stretching
itself, and trimming its whiskers, and turning its snail's eyes round
and round.

"Ha!" it said when its left eye saw Robert; "I've been looking for you.
Where are the rest of you? Not smashed themselves up with those wings,
I hope?"

"No," said Robert; "but the wings got us into a row, just like all the
wishes always do. So the others are kept indoors, and I was only let out
for half an hour--to get the wish. So please let me wish as quickly as I
can."

"Wish away," said the Psammead, twisting itself round in the sand. But
Robert couldn't wish away. He forgot all the things he had been thinking
about, and nothing would come into his head but little things for
himself, like candy, a foreign stamp album, or a knife with three blades
and a corkscrew. He sat down to think better of things the others would
not have cared for--such as a football, or a pair of leg-guards, or to
be able to lick Simpkins Minor thoroughly when he went back to school.

"Well," said the Psammead at last, "you'd better hurry up with that wish
of yours. Time flies."

"I know it does," said Robert. "_I_ can't think what to wish for. I wish
you could give one of the others their wish without their having to
come here to ask for it. Oh, _don't_!"

But it was too late. The Psammead had blown itself out to about three
times its proper size, and now it collapsed like a pricked bubble, and
with a deep sigh leaned back against the edge of the sand-pool, quite
faint with the effort.

"There!" it said in a weak voice; "it was tremendously hard--but I did
it. Run along home, or they're sure to wish for something silly before
you get there."

They were--quite sure; Robert felt this, and as he ran home his mind was
deeply occupied with the sort of wishes he might find they had wished in
his absence. They might wish for rabbits, or white mice, or chocolate,
or a fine day to-morrow, or even--and that was most likely--someone
might have said, "I do wish to goodness Robert would hurry up." Well, he
_was_ hurrying up, and so they would have had their wish, and the day
would be wasted. Then he tried to think what they could wish
for--something that would be amusing indoors. That had been his own
difficulty from the beginning. So few things are amusing indoors when
the sun is shining outside and you mayn't go out, however much you want
to do so.

Robert was running as fast as he could, but when he turned the corner
that ought to have brought him within sight of the architect's
nightmare--the ornamental iron-work on the top of the house--he opened
his eyes so wide that he had to drop into a walk; for you cannot run
with your eyes wide open. Then suddenly he stopped short, for there was
no house to be seen. The front garden railings were gone too, and where
the house had stood--Robert rubbed his eyes and looked again. Yes, the
others _had_ wished,--there was no doubt about it,--and they must have
wished that they lived in a castle; for there the castle stood, black
and stately, and very tall and broad, with battlements and lancet
windows, and eight great towers; and, where the garden and the orchard
had been, there were white things dotted like mushrooms. Robert walked
slowly on, and as he got nearer he saw that these were tents, and men in
armor were walking about among the tents--crowds and crowds of them.

[Illustration: There the castle stood, black and stately]

"Oh!" said Robert fervently. "They _have_! They've wished for a castle,
and it's being besieged! It's just like that Sand-fairy! I wish we'd
never seen the beastly thing!"

At the little window above the great gateway, across the moat that now
lay where the garden had been but half an hour ago, someone was waving
something pale dust-colored. Robert thought it was one of Cyril's
handkerchiefs. They had never been white since the day when he had upset
the bottle of "Combined Toning and Fixing Solution" into the drawer
where they were. Robert waved back, and immediately felt that he had
been unwise. For this signal had been seen by the besieging force, and
two men in steel-caps were coming towards him. They had high brown boots
on their long legs, and they came towards him with such great strides
that Robert remembered the shortness of his own legs and did not run
away. He knew it would be useless to himself, and he feared it might be
irritating to the foe. So he stood still--and the two men seemed quite
pleased with him.

"By my halidom," said one, "a brave varlet this!"

Robert felt pleased at being _called_ brave, and somehow it made him
_feel_ brave. He passed over the "varlet." It was the way people talked
in historical romances for the young, he knew, and it was evidently not
meant for rudeness. He only hoped he would be able to understand what
they said to him. He had not been always able quite to follow the
conversations in the historical romances for the young.

"His garb is strange," said the other. "Some outlandish treachery,
belike."

"Say, lad, what brings thee hither?"

Robert knew this meant, "Now then, youngster, what are you up to here,
eh?"--so he said--

"If you please, I want to go home."

"Go, then!" said the man in the longest boots; "none hindereth, and
nought lets us to follow. Zooks!" he added in a cautious undertone, "I
misdoubt me but he beareth tidings to the besieged."

"Where dwellest thou, young knave?" inquired the man with the largest
steel-cap.

"Over there," said Robert; and directly he had said it he knew he ought
to have said "Yonder!"

"Ha--sayest so?" rejoined the longest boots. "Come hither, boy. This is
matter for our leader."

And to the leader Robert was dragged forthwith--by the reluctant ear.

[Illustration: Robert was dragged forthwith--by the reluctant ear]

The leader was the most glorious creature Robert had ever seen. He was
exactly like the pictures Robert had so often admired in the historical
romances. He had armor, and a helmet, and a horse, and a crest, and
feathers, and a shield and a lance and a sword. His armor and his
weapons were all, I am almost sure, of quite different periods. The
shield was thirteenth century, while the sword was of the pattern
used in the Peninsular War. The cuirass was of the time of Charles I.,
and the helmet dated from the Second Crusade. The arms on the shield
were very grand--three red running lions on a blue ground. The tents
were of the latest brand approved of by our modern War Office, and the
whole appearance of camp, army, and leader might have been a shock to
some. But Robert was dumb with admiration, and it all seemed to him
perfectly correct, because he knew no more of heraldry or archæology
than the gifted artists who usually drew the pictures for the historical
romances. The scene was indeed "exactly like a picture." He admired it
all so much that he felt braver than ever.

"Come hither, lad," said the glorious leader, when the men in
Cromwellian steel-caps had said a few low eager words. And he took off
his helmet, because he could not see properly with it on. He had a kind
face, and long fair hair. "Have no fear; thou shalt take no scathe," he
said.

Robert was glad of that. He wondered what "scathe" was, and if it was
nastier than the medicine which he had to take sometimes.

"Unfold thy tale without alarm," said the leader kindly. "Whence comest
thou, and what is thine intent?"

"My what?" said Robert.

"What seekest thou to accomplish? What is thine errand, that thou
wanderest here alone among these rough men-at-arms? Poor child, thy
mother's heart aches for thee e'en now, I'll warrant me."

"I don't think so," said Robert; "you see, she doesn't know I'm out."

[Illustration: He wiped away a manly tear]

The leader wiped away a manly tear, exactly as a leader in a historical
romance would have done, and said--

"Fear not to speak the truth, my child; thou hast nought to fear from
Wulfric de Talbot."

Robert had a wild feeling that this glorious leader of the besieging
party--being himself part of a wish--would be able to understand better
than Martha, or the gipsies, or the policeman in Rochester, or the
clergyman of yesterday, the true tale of the wishes and the Psammead.
The only difficulty was that he knew he could never remember enough
"quothas" and "beshrew me's," and things like that, to make his talk
sound like the talk of a boy in a historical romance. However, he began
boldly enough, with a sentence straight out of _Ralph de Courcy; or, The
Boy Crusader_. He said--

"Grammercy for thy courtesy, fair sir knight. The fact is, it's like
this--and I hope you're not in a hurry, because the story's rather a
breather. Father and mother are away, and when we went down playing in
the sand-pits we found a Psammead."

"I cry thee mercy! A Sammyadd?" said the knight.

"Yes, a sort of--of fairy, or enchanter--yes, that's it, an enchanter;
and he said we could have a wish every day, and we wished first to be
beautiful."

"Thy wish was scarce granted," muttered one of the men-at-arms, looking
at Robert, who went on as if he had not heard, though he thought the
remark very rude indeed.

"And then we wished for money--treasure, you know; but we couldn't spend
it. And yesterday we wished for wings, and we got them, and we had a
ripping time to begin with"--

"Thy speech is strange and uncouth," said Sir Wulfric de Talbot. "Repeat
thy words--what hadst thou?"

"A ripping--I mean a jolly--no--we were contented with our lot--that's
what I mean; only, after we got into an awful fix."

"What is a fix? A fray, mayhap?"

"No--not a fray. A--a--a tight place."

"A dungeon? Alas for thy youthful fettered limbs!" said the knight, with
polite sympathy.

"It wasn't a dungeon. We just--just encountered undeserved misfortunes,"
Robert explained, "and to-day we are punished by not being allowed to go
out. That's where I live,"--he pointed to the castle. "The others are in
there, and they're not allowed to go out. It's all the Psammead's--I
mean the enchanter's fault. I wish we'd never seen him."

"He is an enchanter of might?"

"Oh yes--of might and main. Rather!"

"And thou deemest that it is the spells of the enchanter whom thou hast
angered that have lent strength to the besieging party," said the
gallant leader; "but know thou that Wulfric de Talbot needs no
enchanter's aid to lead his followers to victory."

"No, I'm sure you don't," said Robert, with hasty courtesy; "of course
not--you wouldn't, you know. But, all the same, it's partly his fault,
but we're most to blame. You couldn't have done anything if it hadn't
been for us."

"How now, bold boy?" asked Sir Wulfric haughtily. "Thy speech is dark,
and eke scarce courteous. Unravel me this riddle!"

"Oh," said Robert desperately, "of course you don't know it, but you're
not _real_ at all. You're only here because the others must have been
idiots enough to wish for a castle--and when the sun sets you'll just
vanish away, and it'll be all right."

The captain and the men-at-arms exchanged glances at first pitying, and
then sterner, as the longest-booted man said, "Beware, my noble lord;
the urchin doth but feign madness to escape from our clutches. Shall we
not bind him?"

"I'm no more mad than you are," said Robert angrily, "perhaps not so
much--Only, I was an idiot to think you'd understand anything. Let me
go--I haven't done anything to you."

"Whither?" asked the knight, who seemed to have believed all the
enchanter story till it came to his own share in it. "Whither wouldst
thou wend?"

"Home, of course." Robert pointed to the castle.

"To carry news of succor? Nay!"

"All right, then," said Robert, struck by a sudden idea; "then let me go
somewhere else." His mind sought eagerly among the memories of the
historical romance.

"Sir Wulfric de Talbot," he said slowly, "should think foul scorn to--to
keep a chap--I mean one who has done him no hurt--when he wants to cut
off quietly--I mean to depart without violence."

"This to my face! Beshrew thee for a knave!" replied Sir Wulfric. But
the appeal seemed to have gone home. "Yet thou sayest sooth," he added
thoughtfully. "Go where thou wilt," he added nobly, "thou art free.
Wulfric de Talbot warreth not with babes, and Jakin here shall bear thee
company."

"All right," said Robert wildly. "Jakin will enjoy himself, I think.
Come on, Jakin. Sir Wulfric, I salute thee."

He saluted after the modern military manner, and set off running to the
sand-pit, Jakin's long boots keeping up easily.

He found the Fairy. He dug it up, he woke it up, he implored it to give
him one more wish.

"I've done two to-day already," it grumbled, "and one was as stiff a bit
of work as ever I did."

"Oh, do, do, do, do, _do_!" said Robert, while Jakin looked on with an
expression of open-mouthed horror at the strange beast that talked, and
gazed with its snail's eyes at him.

[Illustration: "Oh, do, do, _do_!" said Robert]

"Well, what is it?" snapped the Psammead, with cross sleepiness.

"I wish I was with the others," said Robert. And the Psammead began to
swell. Robert never thought of wishing the castle and the siege away. Of
course he knew they had all come out of a wish, but swords and daggers
and pikes and lances seemed much too real to be wished away. Robert lost
consciousness for an instant. When he opened his eyes the others were
crowding round him.

"We never heard you come in," they said. "How awfully jolly of you to
wish it to give us our wish!"

"Of course we understood that was what you'd done."

"But you ought to have told us. Suppose we'd wished something silly."

"Silly?" said Robert, very crossly indeed. "How much sillier could you
have been, I'd like to know? You nearly settled _me_--I can tell
you."

Then he told his story, and the others admitted that it certainly had
been rough on him. But they praised his courage and cleverness so much
that he presently got back his lost temper, and felt braver than ever,
and consented to be captain of the besieged force.

"We haven't done anything yet," said Anthea comfortably; "we waited for
you. We're going to shoot at them through these little loopholes with
the bow and arrows uncle gave you, and you shall have first shot."

"I don't think I would," said Robert cautiously; "you don't know what
they're like near to. They've got _real_ bows and arrows--an awful
length--and swords and pikes and daggers, and all sorts of sharp things.
They're all quite, quite real. It's not just a--a picture, or a vision
or anything; they can _hurt us_--or kill us even, I shouldn't wonder. I
can feel my ear all sore yet. Look here--have you explored the castle?
Because I think we'd better let them alone as long as they let us alone.
I heard that Jakin man say they weren't going to attack till just
before sundown. We can be getting ready for the attack. Are there any
soldiers in the castle to defend it?"

"We don't know," said Cyril. "You see, directly I'd wished we were in a
besieged castle, everything seemed to go upside down, and when it came
straight we looked out of the window, and saw the camp and things and
you--and of course we kept on looking at everything. Isn't this room
jolly? It's as real as real!"

It was. It was square, with stone walls four feet thick, and great beams
for ceiling. A low door at the corner led to a flight of steps, up and
down. The children went down; they found themselves in a great arched
gate-house--the enormous doors were shut and barred. There was a window
in a little room at the bottom of the round turret up which the stair
wound, rather larger than the other windows, and looking through it they
saw that the drawbridge was up and the portcullis down; the moat looked
very wide and deep. Opposite the great door that led to the moat was
another great door, with a little door in it. The children went through
this, and found themselves in a big courtyard, with the great grey walls
of the castle rising dark and heavy on all four sides.

Near the middle of the courtyard stood Martha, moving her right hand
backwards and forwards in the air. The cook was stooping down and moving
her hands, also in a very curious way. But the oddest and at the same
time most terrible thing was the Lamb, who was sitting on nothing, about
three feet from the ground, laughing happily.

The children ran towards him. Just as Anthea was reaching out her arms
to take him, Martha said crossly, "Let him alone--do, miss, when he _is_
good."

"But what's he _doing_?" said Anthea.

"Doing? Why, a-setting in his high chair as good as gold, a precious,
watching me doing of the ironing. Get along with you, do--my iron's cold
again."

She went towards the cook, and seemed to poke an invisible fire with an
unseen poker--the cook seemed to be putting an unseen dish into an
invisible oven.

"Run along with you, do," she said; "I'm behindhand as it is. You won't
get no dinner if you come a-hindering of me like this. Come, off you
goes, or I'll pin a discloth to some of your tails."

"You're _sure_ the Lamb's all right?" asked Jane anxiously.

"Right as ninepence, if you don't come unsettling of him. I thought
you'd like to be rid of him for to-day; but take him, if you want him,
for gracious' sake."

"No, no," they said, and hastened away. They would have to defend the
castle presently, and the Lamb was safer even suspended in mid air in an
invisible kitchen than in the guard-room of the besieged castle. They
went through the first doorway they came to, and sat down helplessly on
a wooden bench that ran along the room inside.

"How awful!" said Anthea and Jane together; and Jane added, "I feel as
if I was in a lunatic asylum."

"What does it mean?" Anthea said. "It's creepy; I don't like it. I wish
we'd wished for something plain--a rocking-horse, or a donkey, or
something."

"It's no use wishing _now_," said Robert bitterly; and Cyril said--

"Do be quiet; I want to think."

He buried his face in his hands, and the others looked about them. They
were in a long room with an arched roof. There were wooden tables along
it, and one across at the end of the room, on a sort of raised platform.
The room was very dim and dark. The floor was strewn with dry things
like sticks, and they did not smell nice.

Cyril sat up suddenly and said--

"Look here--it's all right. I think it's like this. You know, we wished
that the servants shouldn't notice any difference when we got wishes.
And nothing happens to the Lamb unless we specially wish it to. So of
course they don't notice the castle or anything. But then the castle is
on the same place where our house was--is, I mean--and the servants have
to go on being in the house, or else they _would_ notice. But you can't
have a castle mixed up with our house--and so _we_ can't see the house,
because we see the castle; and they can't see the castle, because they
go on seeing the house; and so"--

"Oh, _don't_," said Jane; "you make my head go all swimmy, like being on
a roundabout. It doesn't matter! Only, I hope we shall be able to see
our dinner, that's all--because if it's invisible it'll be unfeelable as
well, and then we can't eat it! I _know_ it will, because I tried to
feel if I could feel the Lamb's chair and there was nothing under him at
all but air. And we can't eat air, and I feel just as if I hadn't had
any breakfast for years and years."

"It's no use thinking about it," said Anthea. "Let's go on exploring.
Perhaps we might find something to eat."

This lighted hope in every breast, and they went on exploring the
castle. But though it was the most perfect and delightful castle you can
possibly imagine, and furnished in the most complete and beautiful
manner, neither food nor men-at-arms were to be found in it.

"If you'd only thought of wishing to be besieged in a castle thoroughly
garrisoned and provisioned!" said Jane reproachfully.

"You can't think of everything, you know," said Anthea. "I should think
it must be nearly dinner-time by now."

It wasn't; but they hung about watching the strange movements of the
servants in the middle of the courtyard, because, of course, they
couldn't be sure where the dining-room of the invisible house was.
Presently they saw Martha carrying an invisible tray across the
courtyard, for it seemed that, by the most fortunate accident, the
dining-room of the house and the banqueting-hall of the castle were in
the same place. But oh, how their hearts sank when they perceived that
the tray _was_ invisible!

They waited in wretched silence while Martha went through the form of
carving an unseen leg of mutton and serving invisible greens and
potatoes with a spoon that no one could see. When she had left the room,
the children looked at the empty table, and then at each other.

"This is worse than anything," said Robert, who had not till now been
particularly keen on his dinner.

"I'm not so very hungry," said Anthea, trying to make the best of
things, as usual.

Cyril tightened his belt ostentatiously. Jane burst into tears.




CHAPTER VII

A SIEGE AND BED


The children were sitting in the gloomy banqueting-hall, at the end of
one of the long bare wooden tables. There was now no hope. Martha had
brought in the dinner, and the dinner was invisible, and unfeelable too;
for, when they rubbed their hands along the table, they knew but too
well that for them there was nothing there _but_ table.

Suddenly Cyril felt in his pocket.

"Right, _oh_!" he cried. "Look here! Biscuits."

Somewhat broken and crumbled, certainly, but still biscuits. Three whole
ones, and a generous handful of crumbs and fragments.

"I got them this morning--cook--and I'd quite forgotten," he explained
as he divided them with scrupulous fairness into four heaps.

They were eaten in a happy silence, though they had an odd taste,
because they had been in Cyril's pocket all the morning with a hank of
tarred twine, some green fir-cones, and a ball of cobbler's wax.

"Yes, but look here, Squirrel," said Robert; "you're so clever at
explaining about invisibleness and all that. How is it the biscuits are
here, and all the bread and meat and things have disappeared?"

"I don't know," said Cyril after a pause, "unless it's because _we_ had
them. Nothing about _us_ has changed. Everything's in my pocket all
right."

"Then if we _had_ the mutton it would be real," said Robert. "Oh, don't
I wish we could find it!"

"But we can't find it. I suppose it isn't ours till we've got it in our
mouths."

"Or in our pockets," said Jane, thinking of the biscuits.

"Who puts mutton in their pockets, goose-girl?" said Cyril. "But I
know--at any rate, I'll try it!"

He leaned over the table with his face about an inch from it, and kept
opening and shutting his mouth as if he were taking bites out of air.

"It's no good," said Robert in deep dejection. "You'll only---- Hullo!"

Cyril stood up with a grin of triumph, holding a square piece of bread
in his mouth. It was quite real. Everyone saw it. It is true that,
directly he bit a piece off, the rest vanished; but it was all right,
because he knew he had it in his hand though he could neither see nor
feel it. He took another bite from the air between his fingers, and it
turned into bread as he bit. The next moment all the others were
following his example, and opening and shutting their mouths an inch or
so from the bare-looking table. Robert captured a slice of mutton,
and--but I think I will draw a veil over the rest of this painful scene.
It is enough to say that they all had enough mutton, and that when
Martha came to change the plates she said she had never seen such a mess
in all her born days.

The pudding was, fortunately, a plain suet one, and in answer to
Martha's questions the children all with one accord said that they would
_not_ have molasses on it--nor jam, nor sugar--"Just plain, please,"
they said. Martha said, "Well, I never--what next, I wonder!" and went
away.

Then ensued another scene on which I will not dwell, for nobody looks
nice picking up slices of suet pudding from the table in its mouth, like
a dog.

The great thing, after all, was that they had had dinner; and now
everyone felt more courage to prepare for the attack that was to be
delivered before sunset. Robert, as captain, insisted on climbing to the
top of one of the towers to reconnoitre, so up they all went. And now
they could see all round the castle, and could see, too, that beyond the
moat, on every side, tents of the besieging party were pitched. Rather
uncomfortable shivers ran down the children's backs as they saw that all
the men were very busy cleaning or sharpening their arms, re-stringing
their bows, and polishing their shields. A large party came along the
road, with horses dragging along the great trunk of a tree; and Cyril
felt quite pale, because he knew this was for a battering-ram.

"What a good thing we've got a moat," he said; "and what a good thing
the drawbridge is up--I should never have known how to work it."

"Of course it would be up in a besieged castle."

"You'd think there ought to have been soldiers in it, wouldn't you?"
said Robert.

"You see you don't know how long it's been besieged," said Cyril darkly;
"perhaps most of the brave defenders were killed early in the siege and
all the provisions eaten, and now there are only a few intrepid
survivors,--that's us, and we are going to defend it to the death."

"How do you begin--defending to the death, I mean?" asked Anthea.

"We ought to be heavily armed--and then shoot at them when they advance
to the attack."

"They used to pour boiling lead down on besiegers when they got too
close," said Anthea. "Father showed me the holes on purpose for pouring
it down through at Bodiam Castle. And there are holes like it in the
gate-tower here."

"I think I'm glad it's only a game; it _is_ only a game, isn't it?" said
Jane.

But no one answered.

The children found plenty of strange weapons in the castle, and if they
were armed at all it was soon plain that they would be, as Cyril said,
"armed heavily"--for these swords and lances and crossbows were far too
weighty even for Cyril's manly strength; and as for the longbows, none
of the children could even begin to bend them. The daggers were better;
but Jane hoped that the besiegers would not come close enough for
daggers to be of any use.

"Never mind, we can hurl them like javelins," said Cyril, "or drop them
on people's heads. I say--there are lots of stones on the other side of
the courtyard. If we took some of those up? Just to drop on their heads
if they were to try swimming the moat."

So a heap of stones grew apace, up in the room above the gate; and
another heap, a shiny spiky dangerous-looking heap, of daggers and
knives.

As Anthea was crossing the courtyard for more stones, a sudden and
valuable idea came to her.

She went to Martha and said, "May we have just biscuits for tea? We're
going to play at besieged castles, and we'd like the biscuits to
provision the garrison. Put mine in my pocket, please, my hands are so
dirty. And I'll tell the others to fetch theirs."

This was indeed a happy thought, for now with four generous handfuls of
air, which turned to biscuits as Martha crammed it into their pockets,
the garrison was well provisioned till sundown.

They brought up some iron pots of cold water to pour on the besiegers
instead of hot lead, with which the castle did not seem to be provided.

The afternoon passed with wonderful quickness. It was very exciting; but
none of them, except Robert, could feel all the time that this was real
deadly dangerous work. To the others, who had only seen the camp and the
besiegers from a distance, the whole thing seemed half a game of
make-believe, and half a splendidly distinct and perfectly safe dream.
But it was only now and then that Robert could feel this.

When it seemed to be tea-time the biscuits were eaten, with water from
the deep well in the courtyard, drunk out of horns. Cyril insisted on
putting by eight of the biscuits, in case anyone should feel faint in
stress of battle.

Just as he was putting away the reserve biscuits in a sort of little
stone cupboard without a door, a sudden sound made him drop three. It
was the loud fierce cry of a trumpet.

"You see it _is_ real," said Robert, "and they are going to attack."

All rushed to the narrow windows.

"Yes," said Robert, "they're all coming out of their tents and moving
about like ants. There's that Jakin dancing about where the bridge
joins on. I wish he could see me put my tongue out at him! Yah!"

The others were far too pale to wish to put their tongues out at
anybody. They looked at Robert with surprised respect. Anthea said--

"You really _are_ brave, Robert."

"Rot!" Cyril's pallor turned to redness now, all in a minute. "He's been
getting ready to be brave all the afternoon. And I wasn't ready, that's
all. I shall be braver than he is in half a jiffy."

"Oh dear!" said Jane, "what does it matter which of you is the bravest?
I think Cyril was a perfect silly to wish for a castle, and I don't want
to play."

"It _isn't_"--Robert was beginning sternly, but Anthea interrupted--

"Oh yes, you do," she said coaxingly; "it's a very nice game, really,
because they can't possibly get in, and if they do the women and
children are always spared by civilised armies."

"But are you quite, quite sure they _are_ civilised?" asked Jane,
panting. "They seem to be such a long time ago."

"Of course they are." Anthea pointed cheerfully through the narrow
window. "Why, look at the little flags on their lances, how bright they
are--and how fine the leader is! Look, that's him--isn't it, Robert?--on
the gray horse."

Jane consented to look, and the scene was almost too pretty to be
alarming. The green turf, the white tents, the flash of pennoned lances,
the gleam of armour, and the bright colours of scarf and tunic--it was
just like a splendid coloured picture. The trumpets were sounding, and
when the trumpeters stopped for breath the children could hear the
cling-clang of armour and the murmur of voices.

A trumpeter came forward to the edge of the moat, which now seemed very
much narrower than at first, and blew the longest and loudest blast they
had yet heard. When the blaring noise had died away, a man who was with
the trumpeter shouted--

"What ho, within there!" and his voice came plainly to the garrison in
the gate-house.

"Hullo there!" Robert bellowed back at once.

"In the name of our Lord the King, and of our good lord and trusty
leader Sir Wulfric de Talbot, we summon this castle to surrender--on
pain of fire and sword and no quarter. Do ye surrender?"

"_No_" bawled Robert; "of course we don't! Never, _Never, NEVER_!"

The man answered back--

"Then your fate be on your own heads."

"Cheer," said Robert in a fierce whisper. "Cheer to show them we aren't
afraid, and rattle the daggers to make more noise. One, two, three! Hip,
hip, hooray! Again--Hip, hip, hooray! One more--Hip, hip, hooray!" The
cheers were rather high and weak, but the rattle of the daggers lent
them strength and depth.

There was another shout from the camp across the moat--and then the
beleaguered fortress felt that the attack had indeed begun.

It was getting rather dark in the room above the great gate, and Jane
took a very little courage as she remembered that sunset _couldn't_ be
far off now.

"The moat is dreadfully thin," said Anthea.

"But they can't get into the castle even if they do swim over," said
Robert. And as he spoke he heard feet on the stair outside--heavy feet
and the clang of steel. No one breathed for a moment. The steel and the
feet went on up the turret stairs. Then Robert sprang softly to the
door. He pulled off his shoes.

"Wait here," he whispered, and stole quickly and softly after the boots
and the spur-clank. He peeped into the upper room. The man was
there--and it was Jakin, all dripping with moat-water, and he was
fiddling about with the machinery which Robert felt sure worked the
drawbridge. Robert banged the door suddenly, and turned the great key in
the lock, just as Jakin sprang to the inside of the door. Then he tore
downstairs and into the little turret at the foot of the tower where the
biggest window was.

"We ought to have defended _this_!" he cried to the others as they
followed him. He was just in time. Another man had swum over, and his
fingers were on the window-ledge. Robert never knew how the man had
managed to climb up out of the water. But he saw the clinging fingers,
and hit them as hard as he could with an iron bar that he caught up from
the floor. The man fell with a splash into the moat-water. In another
moment Robert was outside the little room, had banged its door and was
shooting home the enormous bolts, and calling to Cyril to lend a hand.

[Illustration: The man fell with a splash into the moat-water]

Then they stood in the arched gate-house, breathing hard and looking at
each other.

Jane's mouth was open.

"Cheer up, Jenny," said Robert,--"it won't last much longer."

There was a creaking above, and something rattled and shook. The
pavement they stood on seemed to tremble. Then a crash told them that
the drawbridge had been lowered to its place.

"That's that beast Jakin," said Robert. "There's still the portcullis;
I'm almost certain that's worked from lower down."

And now the drawbridge rang and echoed hollowly to the hoofs of horses
and the tramp of armed men.

"Up--quick!" cried Robert,--"let's drop things on them."

Even the girls were feeling almost brave now. They followed Robert
quickly, and under his directions began to drop stones out through the
long narrow windows. There was a confused noise below, and some groans.

"Oh dear!" said Anthea, putting down the stone she was just going to
drop out, "I'm afraid we've hurt somebody!"

Robert caught up the stone in a fury.

"I should hope we _had_!" he said; "I'd give something for a jolly good
boiling kettle of lead. Surrender, indeed!"

And now came more tramping and a pause, and then the thundering thump of
the battering-ram. And the little room was almost pitch dark.

"We've held it," cried Robert, "we _won't_ surrender! The sun _must_ set
in a minute. Here--they're all jawing underneath again. Pity there's no
time to get more stones! Here, pour that water down on them. It's no
good, of course, but they'll hate it."

"Oh dear!" said Jane, "don't you think we'd better surrender?"

"Never!" said Robert; "we'll have a parley if you like, but we'll never
surrender. Oh, I'll be a soldier when I grow up--you just see if I
don't. I won't go into the Civil Service, whatever anyone says."

"Let's wave a handkerchief and ask for a parley," Jane pleaded. "I don't
believe the sun's going to set to-night at all."

"Give them the water first--the brutes!" said the bloodthirsty Robert.
So Anthea tilted the pot over the nearest lead-hole, and poured. They
heard a splash below, but no one below seemed to have felt it. And again
the ram battered the great door. Anthea paused.

[Illustration: Anthea tilted the pot over the nearest lead-hole]

"How idiotic," said Robert, lying flat on the floor and putting one eye
to the lead-hole. "Of course the holes go straight down into the
gate-house--that's for when the enemy has got past the door and the
portcullis, and almost all is lost. Here, hand me the pot." He crawled
on to the three-cornered window-ledge in the middle of the wall, and,
taking the pot from Anthea, poured the water out through the arrow-slit.

And as he began to pour, the noise of the battering-ram and the
trampling of the foe and the shouts of "Surrender!" and "De Talbot for
ever!" all suddenly stopped and went out like the snuff of a candle; the
little dark room seemed to whirl round and turn topsy-turvy, and when
the children came to themselves there they were, safe and sound, in the
big front bedroom of their own house--the house with the ornamental
nightmare iron-top to the roof.

They all crowded to the window and looked out. The moat and the tents
and the besieging force were all gone--and there was the garden with its
tangle of dahlias and marigolds and asters and later roses, and the
spiky iron railings and the quiet white road.

Everyone drew a deep breath.

"And that's all right!" said Robert. "I told you so! And, I say, we
didn't surrender, did we?"

"Aren't you glad now I wished for a castle?" asked Cyril.

"I think I am _now_," said Anthea slowly. "But I wouldn't wish for it
again, I think, Squirrel dear!"

"Oh, it was simply splendid!" said Jane unexpectedly. "I wasn't
frightened a bit."

"Oh, I say!" Cyril was beginning, but Anthea stopped him.

"Look here," she said, "it's just come into my head. This is the very
first thing we've wished for that hasn't got us into a row. And there
hasn't been the least little scrap of a row about this. Nobody's raging
downstairs, we're safe and sound, we've had an awfully jolly day--at
least, not jolly exactly, but you know what I mean. And we know now how
brave Robert is--and Cyril too, of course," she added hastily, "and
Jane as well. And we haven't got into a row with a single grown-up."

The door was opened suddenly and fiercely.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourselves," said the voice of Martha, and
they could tell by her voice that she was very angry indeed. "I thought
you couldn't last through the day without getting up to some mischief! A
person can't take a breath of air on the front doorstep but you must be
emptying the water jug on their heads! Off you go to bed, the lot of
you, and try to get up better children in the morning. Now then--don't
let me have to tell you twice. If I find any of you not in bed in ten
minutes I'll let you know it, that's all! A new cap, and everything!"

She flounced out amid a disregarded chorus of regrets and apologies. The
children were very sorry, but really it was not their faults.

You can't help it if you are pouring water on a besieging foe, and your
castle suddenly changes into your house--and everything changes with it
except the water, and that happens to fall on somebody else's clean cap.

"I don't know why the water didn't change into nothing, though," said
Cyril.

"Why should it?" asked Robert. "Water's water all the world over."

"I expect the castle well was the same as ours in the stable-yard," said
Jane. And that was really the case.

"I thought we couldn't get through a wish-day without a row," said
Cyril; "it was much too good to be true. Come on, Bobs, my military
hero. If we lick into bed sharp she won't be so furious, and perhaps
she'll bring us up some supper. I'm jolly hungry! Good-night, kids."

"Good-night. I hope the castle won't come creeping back in the night,"
said Jane.

"Of course it won't," said Anthea briskly, "but Martha will--not in the
night, but in a minute. Here, turn round, I'll get that knot out of your
pinafore strings."

"Wouldn't it have been degrading for Sir Wulfric de Talbot," said Jane
dreamily, "if he could have known that half the besieged garrison wore
pinafores?"

"And the other half knickerbockers. Yes--frightfully. Do stand
still--you're only tightening the knot," said Anthea.




CHAPTER VIII

BIGGER THAN THE BAKER'S BOY


"Look here," said Cyril. "I've got an idea."

"Does it hurt much?" said Robert sympathetically.

"Don't be a jackanape! I'm not humbugging."

"Shut up, Bobs!" said Anthea.

"Silence for the Squirrel's oration," said Robert.

Cyril balanced himself on the edge of the water-butt in the backyard,
where they all happened to be, and spoke.

"Friends, Romans, countrymen--and women--we found a Sammyadd. We have
had wishes. We've had wings, and being beautiful as the day--ugh!--that
was pretty jolly beastly if you like--and wealth and castles, and that
rotten gipsy business with the Lamb. But we're no forrarder. We haven't
really got anything worth having for our wishes."

"We've had things happening," said Robert; "that's always something."

"It's not enough, unless they're the right things," said Cyril firmly.
"Now I've been thinking"--

"Not really?" whispered Robert.

"In the silent what's-its-names of the night. It's like suddenly being
asked something out of history--the date of the Conquest or something;
you know it all right all the time, but when you're asked it all goes
out of your head. Ladies and gentlemen, you know jolly well that when
we're all rotting about in the usual way heaps of things keep cropping
up, and then real earnest wishes come into the heads of the beholder"--

"Hear, hear!" said Robert.

"--of the beholder, however, stupid he is," Cyril went on. "Why, even
Robert might happen to think of a really useful wish if he didn't injure
his poor little brains trying so hard to think.--Shut up, Bobs, I tell
you!--You'll have the whole show over."

A struggle on the edge of a water-butt is exciting but damp. When it was
over, and the boys were partially dried, Anthea said--

"It really was you began it, Bobs. Now honour is satisfied, do let
Squirrel go on. We're wasting the whole morning."

"Well then," said Cyril, still wringing the water out of the tails of
his jacket, "I'll call it pax if Bobs will."

"Pax then," said Robert sulkily. "But I've got a lump as big as a
cricket ball over my eye."

Anthea patiently offered a dust-coloured handkerchief, and Robert bathed
his wounds in silence. "Now, Squirrel," she said.

"Well then--let's just play bandits, or forts, or soldiers, or any of
the old games. We're dead sure to think of something if we try not to.
You always do."

The others consented. Bandits was hastily chosen for the game. "It's as
good as anything else," said Jane gloomily. It must be owned that
Robert was at first but a half-hearted bandit, but when Anthea had
borrowed from Martha the red-spotted handkerchief in which the keeper
had brought her mushrooms that morning, and had tied up Robert's head
with it so that he could be the wounded hero who had saved the bandit
captain's life the day before, he cheered up wonderfully. All were soon
armed. Bows and arrows slung on the back look well; and umbrellas and
cricket stumps through the belt give a fine impression of the wearer's
being armed to the teeth. The white cotton hats that men wear in the
country nowadays have a very brigandish effect when a few turkey's
feathers are stuck in them. The Lamb's mail-cart was covered with a
red-and-blue checked table-cloth, and made an admirable baggage-wagon.
The Lamb asleep inside it was not at all in the way. So the banditti set
out along the road that led to the sand-pit.

"We ought to be near the Sammyadd," said Cyril, "in case we think of
anything suddenly."

It is all very well to make up your minds to play bandit--or chess, or
ping-pong, or any other agreeable game--but it is not easy to do it with
spirit when all the wonderful wishes you can think of, or can't think
of, are waiting for you round the corner. The game was dragging a
little, and some of the bandits were beginning to feel that the others
were disagreeable things, and were saying so candidly, when the baker's
boy came along the road with loaves in a basket. The opportunity was not
one to be lost.

"Stand and deliver!" cried Cyril.

"Your money or your life!" said Robert.

And they stood on each side of the baker's boy. Unfortunately, he did
not seem to enter into the spirit of the thing at all. He was a baker's
boy of an unusually large size. He merely said--

"Chuck it now, d'ye hear!" and pushed the bandits aside most
disrespectfully.

Then Robert lassoed him with Jane's skipping-rope, and instead of going
round his shoulders, as Robert intended, it went round his feet and
tripped him up. The basket was upset, the beautiful new loaves went
bumping and bouncing all over the dusty chalky road. The girls ran to
pick them up, and all in a moment Robert and the baker's boy were
fighting it out, man to man, with Cyril to see fair play, and the
skipping-rope twisting round their legs like an interesting snake that
wished to be a peace-maker. It did not succeed; indeed the way the
boxwood handles sprang up and hit the fighters on the shins and ankles
was not at all peace-making. I know this is the second fight--or
contest--in this chapter, but I can't help it. It was that sort of day.
You know yourself there are days when rows seem to keep on happening,
quite without your meaning them to. If I were a writer of tales of
adventure such as those which used to appear in _The Boys of England_
when I was young of course I should be able to describe the fight, but I
cannot do it. I never can see what happens during a fight, even when it
is only dogs. Also, if I had been one of these _Boys of England_
writers, Robert would have got the best of it. But I am like George
Washington--I cannot tell a lie, even about a cherry-tree, much less
about a fight, and I cannot conceal from you that Robert was badly
beaten, for the second time that day. The baker's boy blacked his other
eye, and being ignorant of the first rules of fair play and gentlemanly
behaviour, he also pulled Robert's hair, and kicked him on the knee.
Robert always used to say he could have licked the baker if it hadn't
been for the girls. But I am not sure. Anyway, what happened was this,
and very painful it was to self-respecting boys.

[Illustration: He pulled Robert's hair]

Cyril was just tearing off his coat so as to help his brother in proper
style, when Jane threw her arms round his legs and began to cry and ask
him not to go and be beaten too. That "too" was very nice for Robert, as
you can imagine--but it was nothing to what he felt when Anthea rushed
in between him and the baker's boy, and caught that unfair and degraded
fighter round the waist, imploring him not to fight any more.

"Oh, don't hurt my brother any more!" she said in floods of tears. "He
didn't mean it--it's only play. And I'm sure he's very sorry."

You see how unfair this was to Robert. Because, if the baker's boy had
had any right and chivalrous instincts, and had yielded to Anthea's
pleading and accepted her despicable apology, Robert could not, in
honour, have done anything to him at any future time. But Robert's
fears, if he had any, were soon dispelled. Chivalry was a stranger to
the breast of the baker's boy. He pushed Anthea away very roughly, and
he chased Robert with kicks and unpleasant conversation right down the
road to the sand-pit, and there, with one last kick, he landed him in a
heap of sand.

"I'll larn you, you young varmint!" he said, and went off to pick up his
loaves and go about his business. Cyril, impeded by Jane, could do
nothing without hurting her, for she clung round his legs with the
strength of despair. The baker's boy went off red and damp about the
face; abusive to the last, he called them a pack of silly idiots, and
disappeared round the corner. Then Jane's grasp loosened. Cyril turned
away in silent dignity to follow Robert, and the girls followed him,
weeping without restraint.

It was not a happy party that flung itself down in the sand beside the
sobbing Robert. For Robert was sobbing--mostly with rage. Though of
course I know that a really heroic boy is always dry-eyed after a fight.
But then he always wins, which had not been the case with Robert.

Cyril was angry with Jane; Robert was furious with Anthea; the girls
were miserable; and not one of the four was pleased with the baker's
boy. There was, as French writers say, "a silence full of emotion."

Then Robert dug his toes and his hands into the sand and wriggled in his
rage. "He'd better wait till I'm grown up--the cowardly brute! Beast!--I
hate him! But I'll pay him out. Just because he's bigger than me."

"You began," said Jane incautiously.

"I know I did, silly--but I was only jollying--and he kicked me--look
here"--

Robert tore down a stocking and showed a purple bruise touched up with
red.

"I only wish I was bigger than him, that's all."

He dug his fingers in the sand, and sprang up, for his hand had touched
something furry. It was the Psammead, of course--"On the look-out to
make sillies of them as usual," as Cyril remarked later. And of course
the next moment Robert's wish was granted, and he was bigger than the
baker's boy. Oh, but much, much bigger! He was bigger than the big
policeman who used to be at the crossing at the Mansion House years
ago,--the one who was so kind in helping old ladies over the
crossing,--and he was the biggest man _I_ have ever seen, as well as the
kindest. No one had a foot-rule in its pocket, so Robert could not be
measured--but he was taller than your father would be if he stood on
your mother's head, which I am sure he would never be unkind enough to
do. He must have been ten or eleven feet high, and as broad as a boy of
that height ought to be. His suit had fortunately grown too, and now he
stood up in it--with one of his enormous stockings turned down to show
the gigantic bruise on his vast leg. Immense tears of fury still stood
on his flushed giant face. He looked so surprised, and he was so large
to be wearing a turned down collar outside of his jacket that the others
could not help laughing.

"The Sammyadd's done us again," said Cyril.

[Illustration: "The Sammyadd's done us again," said Cyril]

"Not us--_me_," said Robert. "If you'd got any decent feeling you'd try
to make it make you the same size. You've no idea how silly it feels,"
he added thoughtlessly.

"And I don't want to; I can jolly well see how silly it looks," Cyril
was beginning; but Anthea said--

"Oh, _don't_! I don't know what's the matter with you boys to-day. Look
here, Squirrel, let's play fair. It is hateful for poor old Bobs, all
alone up there. Let's ask the Sammyadd for another wish, and, if it
will, I do really think we ought all to be made the same size."

The others agreed, but not gaily; but when they found the Psammead, it
wouldn't.

"Not I," it said crossly, rubbing its face with its feet. "He's a rude
violent boy, and it'll do him good to be the wrong size for a bit. What
did he want to come digging me out with his nasty wet hands for? He
nearly touched me! He's a perfect savage. A boy of the Stone Age would
have had more sense."

Robert's hands had indeed been wet--with tears.

"Go away and leave me in peace, do," the Psammead went on. "I can't
think why you don't wish for something sensible--something to eat or
drink, or good manners, or good tempers. Go along with you, do!"

It almost snarled as it shook its whiskers, and turned a sulky brown
back on them. The most hopeful felt that further parley was vain.

They turned again to the colossal Robert.

"What ever shall we do?" they said; and they all said it.

"First," said Robert grimly, "I'm going to reason with that baker's boy.
I shall catch him at the end of the road."

"Don't hit a chap smaller than yourself, old man," said Cyril.

"Do I look like hitting him?" said Robert scornfully. "Why, I should
_kill_ him. But I'll give him something to remember. Wait till I pull up
my stocking." He pulled up his stocking, which was as large as a small
bolster-case, and strode off. His strides were six or seven feet long,
so that it was quite easy for him to be at the bottom of the hill, ready
to meet the baker's boy when he came down swinging the empty basket to
meet his master's cart, which had been leaving bread at the cottages
along the road.

Robert crouched behind a haystack in the farmyard, that is at the
corner, and when he heard the boy come whistling along he jumped out at
him and caught him by the collar.

"Now," he said, and his voice was about four times its usual size, just
as his body was four times its, "I'm going to teach you to kick boys
smaller than you."

He lifted up the baker's boy and set him on the top of the haystack,
which was about sixteen feet from the ground, and then he sat down on
the roof of the barn and told the baker's boy exactly what he thought of
him. I don't think the boy heard it all--he was in a sort of trance of
terror. When Robert had said everything he could think of, and some
things twice over, he shook the boy and said--

[Illustration: He lifted up the baker's boy and set him on top of the
haystack]

"And now get down the best way you can," and left him.

I don't know how the baker's boy got down, but I do know that he missed
the cart and got into the very hottest of hot water when he turned up at
last at the bakehouse. I am sorry for him, but after all, it was quite
right that he should be taught that boys mustn't use their feet when
they fight, but their fists. Of course the water he got into only became
hotter when he tried to tell his master about the boy he had licked
and the giant as high as a church, because no one could possibly believe
such a tale as that. Next day the tale was believed--but that was too
late to be of any use to the baker's boy.

When Robert rejoined the others he found them in the garden. Anthea had
thoughtfully asked Martha to let them have dinner out there--because the
dining-room was rather small, and it would have been so awkward to have
a brother the size of Robert in there. The Lamb, who had slept
peacefully during the whole stormy morning, was now found to be
sneezing, and Martha said he had a cold and would be better indoors.

"And really it's just as well," said Cyril, "for I don't believe he'd
ever have stopped screaming if he'd once seen you, the awful size you
are!"

Robert was indeed what a draper would call an "out-size" in boys. He
found himself able to step right over the iron gate in the front
garden.

Martha brought out the dinner--it was cold veal and baked potatoes, with
sago pudding and stewed plums to follow.

She of course did not notice that Robert was anything but the usual
size, and she gave him as much meat and potatoes as usual and no more.
You have no idea how small your usual helping of dinner looks when you
are many times your proper size. Robert groaned, and asked for more
bread. But Martha would not go on giving more bread for ever. She was in
a hurry, because the keeper intended to call on his way to Benenhurst
Fair, and she wished to be smartly dressed before he came.

"I wish _we_ were going to the Fair," said Robert.

"You can't go anywhere that size," said Cyril.

"Why not?" said Robert. "They have giants at fairs, much bigger ones
than me."

"Not much, they don't," Cyril was beginning, when Jane screamed "Oh!"
with such loud suddenness that they all thumped her on the back and
asked whether she had swallowed a plum-stone.

"No," she said, breathless from being thumped, "it's--it's not a
plum-stone. It's an idea. Let's take Robert to the Fair, and get them to
give us money for showing him! Then we really _shall_ get something out
of the old Sammyadd at last!"

"Take me, indeed!" said Robert indignantly. "Much more likely me take
you!"

And so it turned out. The idea appealed irresistibly to everyone but
Robert, and even he was brought round by Anthea's suggestion that he
should have a double share of any money they might make. There was a
little old pony-cart in the coach-house--the kind that is called a
governess-cart. It seemed desirable to get to the Fair as quickly as
possible, so Robert--who could now take enormous steps and so go very
fast indeed--consented to wheel the others in this. It was as easy to
him now as wheeling the Lamb in the mail-cart had been in the morning.
The Lamb's cold prevented his being of the party.

It was a strange sensation being wheeled in a pony-carriage by a giant.
Everyone enjoyed the journey except Robert and the few people they
passed on the way. These mostly went into what looked like some kind of
standing-up fits by the roadside, as Anthea said. Just outside
Benenhurst, Robert hid in a barn, and the others went on to the Fair.

[Illustration: It was a strange sensation being wheeled in a
pony-carriage by a giant]

There were some swings, and a hooting-tooting blaring merry-go-round,
and a shooting-gallery and Aunt Sallies. Resisting an impulse to win a
cocoanut,--or at least to attempt the enterprise,--Cyril went up to the
woman who was loading little guns before the array of glass bottles on
strings against a sheet of canvas.

"Here you are, little gentleman!" she said. "Penny a shot!"

"No, thank you," said Cyril, "we are here on business, not on pleasure.
Who's the master?"

"The what?"

"The master--the head--the boss of the show."

"Over there," she said, pointing to a stout man in a dirty linen jacket
who was sleeping in the sun; "but I don't advise you to wake him sudden.
His temper's contrairy, especially these hot days. Better have a shot
while you're waiting."

"It's rather important," said Cyril. "It'll be very profitable to him. I
think he'll be sorry if we take it away."

"Oh, if it's money in his pocket," said the woman. "No kid now? What is
it?"

"It's a _giant_."

"You _are_ kidding?"

"Come along and see," said Anthea.

The woman looked doubtfully at them, then she called to a ragged little
girl in striped stockings and a dingy white petticoat that came below
her brown frock, and leaving her in charge of the "shooting-gallery" she
turned to Anthea and said, "Well, hurry up! But if you _are_ kidding,
you'd best say so. I'm as mild as milk myself, but my Bill he's a fair
terror and"--

Anthea led the way to the barn. "It really _is_ a giant," she said.
"He's a giant little boy--in a suit like my brother's there. And we
didn't bring him up to the Fair because people do stare so, and they
seem to go into kind of standing-up fits when they see him. And we
thought perhaps you'd like to show him and get pennies; and if you like
to pay us something, you can--only, it'll have to be rather a lot,
because we promised him he should have a double share of whatever we
made."

The woman murmured something indistinct, of which the children could
only hear the words, "Swelp me!" "balmy," and "crumpet," which conveyed
no definite idea to their minds.

She had taken Anthea's hand, and was holding it very firmly; and Anthea
could not help wondering what would happen if Robert should have
wandered off or turned his proper size during the interval. But she knew
that the Psammead's gifts really did last till sunset, however
inconvenient their lasting might be; and she did not think, somehow,
that Robert would care to go out alone while he was that size.

When they reached the barn and Cyril called "Robert!" there was a stir
among the loose hay, and Robert began to come out. His hand and arm came
first--then a foot and leg. When the woman saw the hand she said "My!"
but when she saw the foot she said "Upon my word!" and when, by slow and
heavy degrees, the whole of Robert's enormous bulk was at last
disclosed, she drew a long breath and began to say many things, compared
with which "balmy" and "crumpet" seemed quite ordinary. She dropped into
understandable English at last.

"What'll you take for him?" she said excitedly. "Anything in reason.
We'd have a special van built--leastways, I know where there's a
second-hand one would do up handsome--what a baby elephant had, as died.
What'll you take? He's soft, ain't he? Them giants mostly is--but I
never see--no, never! What'll you take? Down on the nail. We'll treat
him like a king, and give him first-rate grub and a doss fit for a
bloomin' dook. He must be dotty or he wouldn't need you kids to cart him
about. What'll you take for him?"

"They won't take anything," said Robert sternly. "I'm no more soft than
you are--not so much, I shouldn't wonder. I'll come and be a show for
to-day if you'll give me,"--he hesitated at the enormous price he was
about to ask,--"if you'll give me fifteen shillings."

"Done," said the woman, so quickly that Robert felt he had been unfair
to himself, and wished he had asked thirty. "Come on now--and see my
Bill--and we'll fix a price for the season. I dessay you might get as
much as two pounds a week reg'lar. Come on--and make yourself as small
as you can for gracious' sake!"

This was not very small, and a crowd gathered quickly, so that it was at
the head of an enthusiastic procession that Robert entered the trampled
meadow where the Fair was held, and passed over the stubby yellow dusty
grass to the door of the biggest tent. He crept in, and the woman went
to call her Bill. He was the big sleeping man, and he did not seem at
all pleased at being awakened. Cyril, watching through a slit in the
tent, saw him scowl and shake a heavy fist and a sleepy head. Then the
woman went on speaking very fast. Cyril heard "Strewth," and "biggest
draw you ever, so help me!" and he began to share Robert's feeling that
fifteen shillings was indeed far too little. Bill slouched up to the
tent and entered. When he beheld the magnificent proportions of Robert
he said but little,--"Strike me pink!" were the only words the children
could afterwards remember,--but he produced fifteen shillings, mainly in
sixpences and coppers, and handed it to Robert.

"We'll fix up about what you're to draw when the show's over to-night,"
he said with hoarse heartiness. "Lor' love a duck! you'll be that happy
with us you'll never want to leave us. Can you do a song now--or a bit
of a breakdown?"

"Not to-day," said Robert, rejecting the idea of trying to sing "As once
in May," a favourite of his mother's, and the only song he could think
of at the moment.

"Get Levi and clear them bloomin' photos out. Clear the tent. Stick out
a curtain or suthink," the man went on. "Lor', what a pity we ain't got
no tights his size! But we'll have 'em before the week's out. Young man,
your fortune's made. It's a good thing you came to me, and not to some
chaps as I could tell you on. I've known blokes as beat their giants,
and starved 'em too; so I'll tell you straight, you're in luck this day
if you never was afore. 'Cos I'm a lamb, I am--and I don't deceive you."

"I'm not afraid of anyone beating me," said Robert, looking down on the
"lamb." Robert was crouched on his knees, because the tent was not big
enough for him to stand upright in, but even in that position he could
still look down on most people. "But I'm awfully hungry--I wish you'd
get me something to eat."

"Here, 'Becca," said the hoarse Bill. "Get him some grub--the best
you've got, mind!" Another whisper followed, of which the children only
heard, "Down in black and white--first thing to-morrow."

Then the woman went to get the food--it was only bread and cheese when
it came, but it was delightful to the large and empty Robert; and the
man went to post sentinels round the tent, to give the alarm if Robert
should attempt to escape with his fifteen shillings.

"As if we weren't honest," said Anthea indignantly when the meaning of
the sentinels dawned on her.

Then began a very strange and wonderful afternoon.

Bill was a man who knew his business. In a very little while, the
photographic views, the spyglasses you look at them through so that they
really seem rather real, and the lights you see them by, were all packed
away. A curtain--it was an old red-and-black carpet really--was run
across the tent. Robert was concealed behind, and Bill was standing on a
trestle-table outside the tent making a speech. It was rather a good
speech. It began by saying that the giant it was his privilege to
introduce to the public that day was the eldest son of the Emperor of
San Francisco, compelled through an unfortunate love affair with the
Duchess of the Fiji Islands to leave his own country and take refuge in
England--the land of liberty--where freedom was the right of every man,
no matter how big he was. It ended by the announcement that the first
twenty who came to the tent door should see the giant for threepence
apiece. "After that," said Bill, "the price is riz, and I don't
undertake to say what it won't be riz to. So now's yer time."

A young man with his sweetheart on her afternoon out was the first to
come forward. For this occasion his was the princely attitude--no
expense spared--money no object. His girl wished to see the giant? Well,
she should see the giant, even though seeing the giant cost threepence
each and the other entertainments were all penny ones.

The flap of the tent was raised--the couple entered. Next moment a wild
shriek from the girl thrilled through all present. Bill slapped his leg.
"That's done the trick!" he whispered to 'Becca. It was indeed a
splendid advertisement of the charms of Robert.

When the young girl came out she was pale and trembling, and a crowd was
round the tent.

[Illustration: When the girl came out she was pale and trembling]

"What was it like?" asked a farm-hand.

"Oh!--horrid!--you wouldn't believe," she said. "It's as big as a barn,
and that fierce. It froze the blood in my bones. I wouldn't ha' missed
seeing it for anything."

The fierceness was only caused by Robert's trying not to laugh. But the
desire to do that soon left him, and before sunset he was more inclined
to cry than laugh, and more inclined to sleep than either. For, by ones
and twos and threes, people kept coming in all the afternoon, and Robert
had to shake hands with those who wished it, and to allow himself to be
punched and pulled and patted and thumped, so that people might make
sure he was really real.

The other children sat on a bench and watched and waited, and were very
bored indeed. It seemed to them that this was the hardest way of earning
money that could have been invented. And only fifteen shillings! Bill
had taken four times that already, for the news of the giant had spread,
and trades-people in carts, and gentlepeople in carriages, came from far
and near. One gentleman with an eyeglass, and a very large yellow rose
in his buttonhole, offered Robert, in an obliging whisper, ten pounds a
week to appear at the Crystal Palace. Robert had to say "No."

"I can't," he said regretfully. "It's no use promising what you can't
do."

"Ah, poor fellow, bound for a term of years, I suppose! Well, here's my
card; when your time's up come to me."

[Illustration: "When your time's up come to me"]

"I will--if I'm the same size then," said Robert truthfully.

"If you grow a bit, so much the better," said the gentleman.

When he had gone, Robert beckoned Cyril and said--

"Tell them I must and will have a rest. And I want my tea."

Tea was provided, and a paper hastily pinned on the tent. It said--

            CLOSED FOR HALF AN HOUR
          WHILE THE GIANT GETS HIS TEA

Then there was a hurried council.

"How am I to get away?" said Robert.

"I've been thinking about it all the afternoon."

"Why, walk out when the sun sets and you're your right size. They can't
do anything to us."

Robert opened his eyes. "Why, they'd nearly kill us," he said, "when
they saw me get my right size. No, we must think of some other way. We
_must_ be alone when the sun sets."

"I know," said Cyril briskly, and he went to the door, outside which
Bill was smoking a clay pipe and talking in a low voice to 'Becca.
Cyril heard him say--"Good as havin' a fortune left you."

"Look here," said Cyril, "you can let people come in again in a minute.
He's nearly finished tea. But he _must_ be left alone when the sun sets.
He's very queer at that time of day, and if he's worried I won't answer
for the consequences."

"Why--what comes over him?" asked Bill.

"I don't know; it's--it's sort of a _change_," said Cyril candidly. "He
isn't at all like himself--you'd hardly know him. He's very queer
indeed. Someone'll get hurt if he's not alone about sunset." This was
true.

"He'll pull round for the evening, I s'pose?"

"Oh yes--half an hour after sunset he'll be quite himself again."

"Best humour him," said the woman.

And so, at what Cyril judged was about half an hour before sunset, the
tent was again closed "whilst the giant gets his supper."

The crowd was very merry about the giant's meals and their coming so
close together.

"Well, he can pick a bit," Bill owned. "You see he has to eat hearty,
being the size he is."

Inside the tent the four children breathlessly arranged a plan of
retreat.

"You go _now_," said Cyril to the girls, "and get along home as fast as
you can. Oh, never mind the pony-cart; we'll get that to-morrow. Robert
and I are dressed the same. We'll manage somehow, like Sydney Carton
did. Only, you girls _must_ get out, or it's all no go. We can run, but
you can't--whatever you may think. No, Jane, it's no good Robert going
out and knocking people down. The police would follow him till he turned
his proper size, and then arrest him like a shot. Go you must! If you
don't, I'll never speak to you again. It was you got us into this mess
really, hanging round people's legs the way you did this morning. _Go_,
I tell you!"

And Jane and Anthea went.

"We're going home," they said to Bill. "We're leaving the giant with
you. Be kind to him." And that, as Anthea said afterwards, was very
deceitful, but what were they to do?

When they had gone, Cyril went to Bill.

"Look here," he said, "he wants some ears of corn--there's some in the
next field but one. I'll just run and get it. Oh, and he says can't you
loop up the tent at the back a bit? He says he's stifling for a breath
of air. I'll see no one peeps in at him. I'll cover him up, and he can
take a nap while I go for the corn. He _will_ have it--there's no
holding him when he gets like this."

The giant was made comfortable with a heap of sacks and an old
tarpaulin. The curtain was looped up, and the brothers were left alone.
They matured their plan in whispers. Outside, the merry-go-round blared
out its comic tunes, screaming now and then to attract public notice.

Half a minute after the sun had set, a boy came out past Bill.

"I'm off for the corn," he said, and mingled quickly with the crowd.

At the same instant a boy came out of the back of the tent past 'Becca,
posted there as sentinel.

"I'm off after the corn," said this boy also. And he, too, moved away
quietly and was lost in the crowd. The front-door boy was Cyril; the
back-door was Robert--now, since sunset, once more his proper size. They
walked quickly through the field, along the road, where Robert caught
Cyril up. Then they ran. They were home as soon as the girls were, for
it was a long way, and they ran most of it. It was indeed a _very_ long
way, as they found when they had to go and drag the pony-cart home next
morning, with no enormous Robert to wheel them in it as if it were a
mail-cart, and they were babies and he was their gigantic nursemaid.

       *       *       *       *       *

I cannot possibly tell you what Bill and 'Becca said when they found
that the giant had gone. For one thing, I do not know.





CHAPTER IX

GROWN UP


Cyril had once pointed out that ordinary life is full of occasions on
which a wish would be most useful. And this thought filled his mind when
he happened to wake early on the morning after the morning after Robert
had wished to be bigger than the baker's boy, and had been it. The day
that lay between these two days had been occupied entirely by getting
the governess-cart home from Benenhurst.

Cyril dressed hastily; he did not take a bath, because tin baths are so
noisy, and he had no wish to rouse Robert, and he slipped off alone, as
Anthea had once done, and ran through the dewy morning to the sand-pit.
He dug up the Psammead very carefully and kindly, and began the
conversation by asking it whether it still felt any ill effects from
the contact with the tears of Robert the day before yesterday. The
Psammead was in good temper. It replied politely.

"And now, what can I do for you?" it said. "I suppose you've come here
so early to ask for something for yourself--something your brothers and
sisters aren't to know about, eh? Now, do be persuaded for your own
good! Ask for a good fat Megatherium and have done with it."

"Thank you--not to-day, I think," said Cyril cautiously. "What I really
wanted to say was--you know how you're always wishing for things when
you're playing at anything?"

"I seldom play," said the Psammead coldly.

"Well, you know what I mean," Cyril went on impatiently. "What I want to
say is: won't you let us have our wish just when we think of it, and
just where we happen to be? So that we don't have to come and disturb
you again," added the crafty Cyril.

"It'll only end in your wishing for something you don't really want, as
you did about the castle," said the Psammead, stretching its brown arms
and yawning. "It's always the same since people left off eating really
wholesome things. However, have it your own way. Good-bye."

"Good-bye," said Cyril politely.

"I'll tell you what," said the Psammead suddenly, shooting out its long
snail's eyes,--"I'm getting tired of you--all of you. You have no more
sense than so many oysters. Go along with you!"

And Cyril went.

"What an awful long time babies _stay_ babies," said Cyril after the
Lamb had taken his watch out of his pocket while he wasn't noticing, and
with coos and clucks of naughty rapture had opened the case and used the
whole thing as a garden spade, and when even immersion in a wash basin
had failed to wash the mould from the works and make the watch go again.
Cyril had said several things in the heat of the moment; but now he was
calmer, and had even consented to carry the Lamb part of the way to
the woods. Cyril had persuaded the others to agree to his plan, and not
to wish for anything more till they really did wish it. Meantime it
seemed good to go to the woods for nuts, and on the mossy grass under a
sweet chestnut tree the five were sitting. The Lamb was pulling up the
moss by fat handfuls, and Cyril was gloomily contemplating the ruins of
his watch.

[Illustration: He opened the case and used the whole thing as a garden
spade]

"He does grow," said Anthea. "Doesn't 'oo, precious?"

"Me grow," said the Lamb cheerfully--"me grow big boy, have guns' an'
mouses--an'--an'"---- Imagination or vocabulary gave out here. But
anyway it was the longest speech the Lamb had ever made, and it charmed
everyone, even Cyril, who tumbled the Lamb over and rolled him in the
moss to the music of delighted squeals.

"I suppose he'll be grown up some day," Anthea was saying, dreamily
looking up at the blue of the sky that showed between the long straight
chestnut-leaves. But at that moment the Lamb, struggling gaily with
Cyril, thrust a stout-shod little foot against his brother's chest;
there was a crack!--the innocent Lamb had broken the glass of father's
second-best Waterbury watch, which Cyril had borrowed without leave.

"Grow up some day!" said Cyril bitterly, plumping the Lamb down on the
grass. "I daresay he will--when nobody wants him to. I wish to goodness
he would"--

"_Oh_, take care!" cried Anthea in an agony of apprehension. But it was
too late--like music to a song her words and Cyril's came out together--

Anthea--"Oh, take care!"

Cyril--"Grow up now!"

The faithful Psammead was true to its promise, and there, before the
horrified eyes of its brothers and sisters, the Lamb suddenly and
violently grew up. It was the most terrible moment. The change was not
so sudden as the wish-changes usually were. The Baby's face changed
first. It grew thinner and larger, lines came in the forehead, the eyes
grew more deep-set and darker in colour, the mouth grew longer and
thinner; most terrible of all, a little dark mustache appeared on the
lip of one who was still--except as to the face--a two-year-old baby in
a linen smock and white open-work socks.

"Oh, I wish it wouldn't! Oh, I wish it wouldn't! You boys might wish as
well!"

They all wished hard, for the sight was enough to dismay the most
heartless. They all wished so hard, indeed, that they felt quite giddy
and almost lost consciousness; but the wishing was quite vain, for, when
the wood ceased to whirl round, their dazed eyes were riveted at once by
the spectacle of a very proper-looking young man in flannels and a straw
hat--a young man who wore the same little black mustache which just
before they had actually seen growing upon the Baby's lip. This, then,
was the Lamb--grown up! Their own Lamb! It was a terrible moment. The
grown-up Lamb moved gracefully across the moss and settled himself
against the trunk of the sweet chestnut. He tilted the straw hat over
his eyes. He was evidently weary. He was going to sleep. The Lamb--the
original little tiresome beloved Lamb often went to sleep at odd times
and in unexpected places. Was this new Lamb in the grey flannel suit and
the pale green necktie like the other Lamb? or had his mind grown up
together with his body?

That was the question which the others, in a hurried council held among
the yellowing brake-fern a few yards from the sleeper, debated eagerly.

"Whichever it is, it'll be just as awful," said Anthea. "If his inside
senses are grown up too, he won't stand our looking after him; and if
he's still a baby inside of him how on earth are we to get him to do
anything? And it'll be getting on for dinner-time in a minute."

"And we haven't got any nuts," said Jane.

"Oh bother nuts!" said Robert, "but dinner's different--I didn't have
half enough dinner yesterday. Couldn't we tie him to the tree and go
home to our dinner and come back afterwards?"

"A fat lot of dinner we should get if we went back without the Lamb!"
said Cyril in scornful misery. "And it'll be just the same if we go back
with him in the state he is now. Yes, I know it's my doing; don't rub it
in! I know I'm a beast, and not fit to live; you can take that for
settled, and say no more about it. The question is, what are we going to
do?"

"Let's wake him up, and take him into Rochester or Maidstone and get
something to eat at a baker's shop," said Robert hopefully.

"Take him?" repeated Cyril. "Yes--do! It's all my fault--I don't deny
that--but you'll find you've got your work cut out for you if you try to
take that young man anywhere. The Lamb always was spoilt, but now he's
grown up he's a demon--simply. I can see it. Look at his mouth."

"Well then," said Robert, "let's wake him up and see what _he'll_ do.
Perhaps _he'll_ take _us_ to Maidstone and stand treat. He ought to have
a lot of money in the pockets of those extra-special pants. We _must_
have dinner, anyway."

They drew lots with little bits of brake fern. It fell to Jane's lot to
waken the grown-up Lamb.

She did it gently by tickling his nose with a twig of honeysuckle. He
said "Bother the flies!" twice, and then opened his eyes.

[Illustration: She did it gently by tickling his nose with a twig of
honeysuckle]

"Hullo, kiddies!" he said in a languid tone, "still here? What's the
giddy hour? You'll be late for your grub!"

"I know we shall," said Robert bitterly.

"Then cut along home," said the grown-up Lamb.

"What about your grub, though?" asked Jane.

"Oh, how far is it to the station, do you think? I've a sort of a notion
that I'll run up to town and have some lunch at the club."

Blank misery fell like a pall on the four others. The
Lamb--alone--unattended--would go to town and have lunch at a club!
Perhaps he would also have tea there. Perhaps sunset would come upon him
amid the dazzling luxury of club-land, and a helpless cross sleepy
baby would find itself alone amid unsympathetic waiters, and would wail
miserably for "Panty" from the depths of a club arm-chair! The picture
moved Anthea almost to tears.

"Oh no, Lamb ducky, you mustn't do that!" she cried incautiously.

The grown-up Lamb frowned. "My dear Anthea," he said, "how often am I to
tell you that my name is Hilary or St. Maur or Devereux?--any of my
baptismal names are free to my little brothers and sisters, but _not_
'Lamb'--a relic of foolishness and far-off childhood."

This was awful. He was their elder brother now, was he? Well of course
he was, if he was grown-up--since they weren't. Thus, in whispers,
Anthea and Robert.

But the almost daily adventures resulting from the Psammead's wishes
were making the children wise beyond their years.

"Dear Hilary," said Anthea, and the others choked at the name, "you know
father didn't wish you to go to London. He wouldn't like us to be left
alone without you to take care of us. Oh, deceitful thing that I am!"
she added to herself.

"Look here," said Cyril, "if you're our elder brother, why not behave as
sich and take us over to Maidstone and give us a jolly good blow-out,
and we'll go on the river afterwards?"

"I'm infinitely obliged to you," said the Lamb courteously, "but I
should prefer solitude. Go home to your lunch--I mean your dinner.
Perhaps I may look in about tea-time--or I may not be home till after
you are in your beds."

Their beds! Speaking glances flashed between the wretched four. Much bed
there would be for them if they went home without the Lamb.

"We promised mother not to lose sight of you if we took you out," Jane
said before the others could stop her.

"Look here, Jane," said the grown-up Lamb, putting his hands in his
pockets and looking down at her, "little girls should be seen and not
heard. You kids must learn not to make yourselves a nuisance. Run along
home now--and perhaps, if you're good, I'll give you each a penny
to-morrow."

"Look here," said Cyril, in the best "man to man" tone at his command,
"where are you going, old man? You might let Bobs and me come with
you--even if you don't want the girls."

This was really rather noble of Cyril, for he never did care much about
being seen in public with the Lamb, who of course after sunset would be
a baby again.

The "man to man" tone succeeded.

"I shall run over to Maidstone on my bike," said the new Lamb airily,
fingering the little black mustache. "I can lunch at The Crown--and
perhaps I'll have a pull on the river; but I can't take you all on the
machine--now, can I? Run along home, like good children."

The position was desperate. Robert exchanged a despairing look with
Cyril. Anthea detached a pin from her waistband, a pin whose withdrawal
left a gaping chasm between skirt and bodice, and handed it furtively to
Robert--with a grimace of the darkest and deepest meaning. Robert
slipped away to the road. There, sure enough, stood a bicycle--a
beautiful new one. Of course Robert understood at once that if the Lamb
was grown up he _must_ have a bicycle.

[Illustration: There, sure enough, stood a bicycle]

This had always been one of Robert's own reasons for wishing to be
grown-up. He hastily began to use the pin--eleven punctures in the back
tyre, seven in the front. He would have made the total twenty-two but
for the rustling of the yellow hazel-leaves, which warned him of the
approach of the others. He hastily leaned a hand on each wheel, and was
rewarded by the "whish" of the what was left of air escaping from
eighteen neat pin-holes.

"Your bike's run down," said Robert, wondering how he could so soon have
learned to deceive.

"So it is," said Cyril.

"It's a puncture," said Anthea, stooping down, and standing up again
with a thorn which she had got ready for the purpose.

"Look here."

The grown-up Lamb (or Hilary, as I suppose one must now call him) fixed
his pump and blew up the tyre. The punctured state of it was soon
evident.

[Illustration: The punctured state of it was soon evident]

"I suppose there's a cottage somewhere near--where one could get a pail
of water?" said the Lamb.

There was; and when the number of punctures had been made manifest, it
was felt to be a special blessing that the cottage provided "teas for
cyclists." It provided an odd sort of tea-and-hammy meal for the Lamb
and his brothers. This was paid for out of the fifteen shillings which
had been earned by Robert when he was a giant--for the Lamb, it
appeared, had unfortunately no money about him. This was a great
disappointment for the others; but it is a thing that will happen, even
to the most grown-up of us. However, Robert had enough to eat, and that
was something. Quietly but persistently the miserable four took it in
turns to try and persuade the Lamb (or St. Maur) to spend the rest of
the day in the woods. There was not very much of the day left by the
time he had mended the eighteenth puncture. He looked up from the
completed work with a sigh of relief, and suddenly put his tie straight.

"There's a lady coming," he said briskly,--"for goodness' sake, get out
of the way. Go home--hide--vanish somehow! I can't be seen with a pack
of dirty kids." His brothers and sisters were indeed rather dirty,
because, earlier in the day, the Lamb, in his infant state, had
sprinkled a good deal of garden soil over them. The grown-up Lamb's
voice was so tyrant-like, as Jane said afterwards, that they actually
retreated to the back garden, and left him with his little mustache and
his flannel suit to meet alone the young lady, who now came up the front
garden wheeling a bicycle.

The woman of the house came out, and the young lady spoke to her,--the
Lamb raised his hat as she passed him,--and the children could not hear
what she said, though they were craning round the corner and listening
with all their ears. They felt it to be "perfectly fair," as Robert
said, "with that wretched Lamb in that condition."

When the Lamb spoke, in a languid voice heavy with politeness, they
heard well enough.

"A puncture?" he was saying. "Can I not be of any assistance? If you
could allow me----?"

There was a stifled explosion of laughter and the grown-up Lamb
(otherwise Devereux) turned the tail of an angry eye in its direction.

"You're very kind," said the lady, looking at the Lamb. She looked
rather shy, but, as the boys put it, there didn't seem to be any
nonsense about her.

"But oh," whispered Cyril, "I should have thought he'd had enough
bicycle-mending for one day--and if she only knew that really and truly
he's only a whiny-piny, silly little baby!"

"He's _not_," Anthea murmured angrily. "He's a dear--if people only let
him alone. It's our own precious Lamb still, whatever silly idiots may
turn him into--isn't he, Pussy?"

Jane doubtfully supposed so.

Now, the Lamb--whom I must try to remember to call St. Maur--was
examining the lady's bicycle and talking to her with a very grown-up
manner indeed. No one could possibly have supposed, to see and hear him,
that only that very morning he had been a chubby child of two years
breaking other people's Waterbury watches. Devereux (as he ought to be
called for the future) took out a gold watch when he had mended the
lady's bicycle, and all the hidden onlookers said "Oh!"--because it
seemed so unfair that the Baby, who had only that morning destroyed two
cheap but honest watches, should now, in the grown-upness to which
Cyril's folly had raised him, have a real gold watch--with a chain and
seals!

Hilary (as I will now term him) withered his brothers and sisters with a
glance, and then said to the lady--with whom he seemed to be quite
friendly--

"If you will allow me, I will ride with you as far as the Cross Roads;
it is getting late, and there are tramps about."

No one will ever know what answer the young lady intended to give to
this gallant offer, for, directly Anthea heard it made, she rushed out,
knocking against a swill pail, which overflowed in a turbid stream, and
caught the Lamb (I suppose I ought to say Hilary) by the arm. The others
followed, and in an instant the four dirty children were visible beyond
disguise.

"Don't let him," said Anthea to the lady, and she spoke with intense
earnestness; "he's not fit to go with anyone!"

"Go away, little girl!" said St. Maur (as we will now call him) in a
terrible voice.

"Go home at once!"

"You'd much better not have anything to do with him," the now reckless
Anthea went on. "He doesn't know who he is. He's something very
different from what you think he is."

"What do you mean?" asked the lady, not unnaturally, while Devereux (as
I must term the grown-up Lamb) tried vainly to push Anthea away. The
others backed her up, and she stood solid as a rock.

"You just let him go with you," said Anthea, "you'll soon see what I
mean! How would you like to suddenly see a poor little helpless baby
spinning along downhill beside you with its feet up on a bicycle it had
lost control of?"

The lady had turned rather pale.

"Who are these very dirty children?" she asked the grown-up Lamb
(sometimes called St. Maur in these pages).

"I don't know," he lied miserably.

"Oh, Lamb! how _can_ you?" cried Jane,--"when you know perfectly well
you're our own little baby brother that we're so fond of. We're his big
brothers and sisters," she explained, turning to the lady, who with
trembling hands was now turning her bicycle towards the gate, "and we've
got to take care of him. And we must get him home before sunset, or I
don't know whatever will become of us. You see, he's sort of under a
spell--enchanted--you know what I mean!"

Again and again the Lamb (Devereux, I mean) had tried to stop Jane's
eloquence, but Robert and Cyril held him, one by each leg, and no proper
explanation was possible. The lady rode hastily away, and electrified
her relatives at dinner by telling them of her escape from a family of
dangerous lunatics. "The little girl's eyes were simply those of a
maniac. I can't think how she came to be at large," she said.

When her bicycle had whizzed away down the road, Cyril spoke gravely.

"Hilary, old chap," he said, "you must have had a sunstroke or
something. And the things you've been saying to that lady! Why, if we
were to tell you the things you've said when you are yourself again,
say to-morrow morning, you wouldn't ever understand them--let alone
believe them! You trust to me, old chap, and come home now, and if
you're not yourself in the morning we'll ask the milkman to ask the
doctor to come."

The poor grown-up Lamb (St. Maur was really one of his Christian names)
seemed now too bewildered to resist.

"Since you seem all to be as mad as the whole worshipful company of
hatters," he said bitterly, "I suppose I _had_ better take you home. But
you're not to suppose I shall pass this over. I shall have something to
say to you all to-morrow morning."

"Yes, you will, my Lamb," said Anthea under her breath, "but it won't be
at all the sort of thing you think it's going to be."

In her heart she could hear the pretty, soft little loving voice of the
baby Lamb--so different from the affected tones of the dreadful grown-up
Lamb (one of whose names was Devereux)--saying, "Me love Panty--wants to
come to own Panty."

"Oh, let's go home, for goodness' sake," she said. "You shall say
whatever you like in the morning--if you can," she added in a whisper.

It was a gloomy party that went home through the soft evening. During
Anthea's remarks Robert had again made play with the pin and the bicycle
tyre, and the Lamb (whom they had to call St. Maur or Devereux or
Hilary) seemed really at last to have had his fill of bicycle-mending.
So the machine was wheeled.

The sun was just on the point of setting when they arrived at the White
House. The four elder children would have liked to linger in the lane
till the complete sunsetting turned the grown-up Lamb (whose Christian
names I will not further weary you by repeating) into their own dear
tiresome baby brother. But he, in his grown-upness, insisted on going
on, and thus he was met in the front garden by Martha.

Now you remember that, as a special favour, the Psammead had arranged
that the servants in the house should never notice any change brought
about by the wishes of the children. Therefore Martha merely saw the
usual party, with the baby Lamb, about whom she had been desperately
anxious all the afternoon, trotting beside Anthea, on fat baby legs,
while the children, of course, still saw the grown-up Lamb (never mind
what names he was christened by), and Martha rushed at him and caught
him in her arms, exclaiming--

"Come to his own Martha, then--a precious poppet!"

The grown-up Lamb (whose names shall now be buried in oblivion)
struggled furiously. An expression of intense horror and annoyance was
seen on his face. But Martha was stronger than he. She lifted him up and
carried him into the house. None of the children will ever forget that
picture. The neat grey-flannel-suited grown-up young man with the green
necktie and the little black mustache--fortunately, he was slightly
built, and not tall--struggling in the sturdy arms of Martha, who
bore him away helpless, imploring him, as she went, to be a good boy
now, and come and have his nice bremmink! Fortunately, the sun set as
they reached the doorstep, the bicycle disappeared, and Martha was seen
to carry into the house the real live darling sleepy two-year-old Lamb.
The grown-up Lamb (nameless henceforth) was gone for ever.

[Illustration: The grown-up Lamb struggled]

"For ever," said Cyril, "because, as soon as ever the Lamb's old enough
to be bullied, we must jolly well begin to bully him, for his own
sake--so that he mayn't grow up like _that_."

"You shan't bully him," said Anthea stoutly,--"not if I can stop it."

"We must tame him by kindness," said Jane.

"You see," said Robert, "if he grows up in the usual way, there'll be
plenty of time to correct him as he goes along. The awful thing to-day
was his growing up so suddenly. There was no time to improve him at
all."

"He doesn't want any improving," said Anthea as the voice of the Lamb
came cooing through the open door, just as she had heard it in her heart
that afternoon--

"Me loves Panty--wants to come to own Panty!"




CHAPTER X

SCALPS


Probably the day would have been a greater success if Cyril had not been
reading _The Last of the Mohicans_. The story was running in his head at
breakfast, and as he took his third cup of tea he said dreamily, "I wish
there were Red Indians in England--not big ones, you know, but little
ones, just about the right size for us to fight."

Everyone disagreed with him at the time and no one attached any
importance to the incident. But when they went down to the sand-pit to
ask for a hundred pounds in two-shilling pieces with Queen Victoria's
head on, to prevent mistakes--which they had always felt to be a really
reasonable wish that must turn out well--they found out that they had
done it again! For the Psammead, which was very cross and sleepy,
said--

"Oh, don't bother me. You've had your wish."

"I didn't know it," said Cyril.

"Don't you remember yesterday?" said the Sand-fairy, still more
disagreeably. "You asked me to let you have your wishes wherever you
happened to be, and you wished this morning, and you've got it."

"Oh, have we?" said Robert. "What is it?"

"So you've forgotten?" said the Psammead, beginning to burrow. "Never
mind; you'll know soon enough. And I wish you joy of it! A nice thing
you've let yourselves in for!"

"We always do somehow," said Jane sadly.

And now the odd thing was that no one could remember anyone's having
wished for anything that morning. The wish about the Red Indians had not
stuck in anyone's head. It was a most anxious morning. Everyone was
trying to remember what had been wished for, and no one could, and
everyone kept expecting something awful to happen every minute. It was
most agitating; they knew from what the Psammead had said, that they
must have wished for something more than usually undesirable, and they
spent several hours in most agonizing uncertainty. It was not till
nearly dinner-time that Jane tumbled over _The Last of the
Mohicans_,--which had of course, been left face downwards on the
floor,--and when Anthea had picked her and the book up she suddenly
said, "I know!" and sat down flat on the carpet.

"Oh, Pussy, how awful! It was Indians he wished for--Cyril--at
breakfast, don't you remember? He said, 'I wish there were Red Indians
in England,'--and now there are, and they're going about scalping people
all over the country, as likely as not."

"Perhaps they're only in Northumberland and Durham," said Jane
soothingly. It was almost impossible to believe that it could really
hurt people much to be scalped so far away as that.

"Don't you believe it!" said Anthea. "The Sammyadd said we'd let
ourselves in for a nice thing. That means they'll come _here_. And
suppose they scalped the Lamb!"

"Perhaps the scalping would come right again at sunset," said Jane; but
she did not speak so hopefully as usual.

"Not it!" said Anthea. "The things that grow out of the wishes don't go.
Look at the fifteen shillings! Pussy, I'm going to break something, and
you must let me have every penny of money you've got. The Indians will
come _here_, don't you see? That Spiteful Psammead as good as said so.
You see what my plan is? Come on!"

Jane did not see at all. But she followed her sister meekly into
mother's bedroom.

Anthea lifted down the heavy water-jug--it had a pattern of storks and
long grasses on it, which Anthea never forgot. She carried it into the
dressing-room, and carefully emptied the water out of it into the bath.
Then she took the jug back into the bedroom and dropped it on the floor.
You know how a jug always breaks if you happen to drop it by accident.
If you happen to drop it on purpose, it is quite different. Anthea
dropped that jug three times, and it was as unbroken as ever. So at last
she had to take her father's boot-tree and break the jug with that in
cold blood. It was heartless work.

Next she broke open the missionary-box with the poker. Jane told her
that it was wrong, of course, but Anthea shut her lips very tight and
then said--

[Illustration: She broke open the missionary-box with the poker.]

"Don't be silly--it's a matter of life and death."

There was not very much in the missionary-box,--only
seven-and-fourpence,--but the girls between them had nearly four
shillings. This made over eleven shillings, as you will easily see.

Anthea tied up the money in a corner of her pocket-handkerchief. "Come
on, Jane!" she said, and ran down to the farm. She knew that the farmer
was going into Rochester that afternoon. In fact it had been arranged
that he was to take the four children with him. They had planned this in
the happy hour when they believed that they we're going to get that
hundred pounds, in two-shilling pieces, out of the Psammead. They had
arranged to pay the farmer two shillings each for the ride. Now Anthea
hastily explained to him that they could not go, but would he take
Martha and the Baby instead? He agreed, but he was not pleased to get
only half-a-crown instead of eight shillings.

Then the girls ran home again. Anthea was agitated, but not flurried.
When she came to think it over afterwards, she could not help seeing
that she had acted with the most far-seeing promptitude, just like a
born general. She fetched a little box from her corner drawer, and went
to find Martha, who was laying the cloth and not in the best of tempers.

"Look here," said Anthea. "I've broken the water jug in mother's room."

"Just like you--always up to some mischief," said Martha, dumping down a
salt-cellar with a bang.

"Don't be cross, Martha dear," said Anthea. "I've got enough money to
pay for a new one--if only you'll be a dear and go and buy it for us.
Your cousins keep a china-shop, don't they? And I would like you to get
it to-day, in case mother comes home to-morrow. You know she said she
might perhaps."

"But you're all going into town yourselves," said Martha.

"We can't afford to, if we get the new jug," said Anthea; "but we'll pay
for you to go, if you'll take the Lamb. And I say, Martha, look
here--I'll give you my Liberty box, if you'll go. Look, it's most
awfully pretty--all inlaid with real silver and ivory and ebony, like
King Solomon's temple."

"I see," said Martha,--"no, I don't want your box, miss. What you want
is to get the precious Lamb off your hands for the afternoon. Don't you
go for to think I don't see through you!"

This was so true that Anthea longed to deny it at once. Martha had no
business to know so much. But she held her tongue.

Martha set down the bread with a bang that made it jump off its
trencher.

"I _do_ want the jug got," said Anthea softly. "You _will_ go, won't
you?"

"Well, just for this once, I don't mind; but mind you don't get into
none of your outrageous mischief while I'm gone--that's all!"

"He's going earlier than he thought," said Anthea eagerly. "You'd better
hurry and get dressed. Do put on that lovely purple frock, Martha, and
the hat with the pink cornflowers, and the yellow-lace collar. Jane'll
finish laying the cloth, and I'll wash the Lamb and get him ready."

As she washed the unwilling Lamb and hurried him into his best clothes,
Anthea peeped out of the window from time to time; so far all was
well--she could see no Red Indians. When with a rush and a scurry and
some deepening of the damask of Martha's complexion she and the Lamb had
been got off, Anthea drew a deep breath.

"_He's_ safe!" she said, and, to Jane's horror, flung herself down on
the floor and burst into floods of tears. Jane did not understand at all
how a person could be so brave and like a general, and then suddenly
give way and go flat like an air-balloon when you prick it. It is better
not to go flat, of course, but you will observe that Anthea did not give
way till her aim was accomplished. She had got the dear Lamb out of
danger--she felt certain that the Red Indians would be round the White
House or nowhere--the farmer's cart would not come back till after
sunset, so she could afford to cry a little. It was partly with joy that
she cried, because she had done what she meant to do. She cried for
about three minutes, while Jane hugged her miserably and said at
five-second intervals, "Don't cry, Panther dear!"

Then she jumped up, rubbed her eyes hard with the corner of her
pinafore, so that they kept red for the rest of the day, and started to
tell the boys. But just at that moment cook rang the dinner-bell, and
nothing could be said till they had been helped to minced beef. Then
cook left the room, and Anthea told her tale. But it is a mistake to
tell a thrilling tale when people are eating minced beef and boiled
potatoes. There seemed somehow to be something about the food that made
the idea of Red Indians seem flat and unbelievable. The boys actually
laughed, and called Anthea a little silly.

"Why," said Cyril, "I'm almost sure it was before I said that, that Jane
said she wished it would be a fine day."

"It wasn't," said Jane briefly.

"Why, if it was Indians," Cyril went on,--"salt, please, and mustard--I
must have something to make this mush go down,--if it was Indians,
they'd have been infesting the place long before this--you know they
would. I believe it's the fine day."

"Then why did the Sammyadd say we'd let ourselves in for a nice thing?"
asked Anthea. She was feeling very cross. She knew she had acted with
nobility and discretion, and after that it was very hard to be called a
little silly, especially when she had the weight of a burglared
missionary-box and about seven-and-fourpence, mostly in coppers, lying
like lead upon her conscience.

There was a silence, during which cook took away the mincy plates and
brought in the pudding. As soon as she had retired, Cyril began again.

"Of course I don't mean to say," he admitted, "that it wasn't a good
thing to get Martha and the Lamb out of the way for the afternoon; but
as for Red Indians--why, you know jolly well the wishes always come that
very minute. If there was going to be Red Indians, they'd be here now."

"I expect they are," said Anthea; "they're lurking amid the undergrowth,
for anything you know. I do think you're most unkind."

"Indians almost always _do_ lurk, really, though, don't they?" put in
Jane, anxious for peace.

"No, they don't," said Cyril tartly. "And I'm not unkind, I'm only
truthful. And I say it was utter rot breaking the water-jug; and as for
the missionary-box, I believe it's a treason-crime, and I shouldn't
wonder if you could be hanged for it, if any of us was to split"--

"Shut up, can't you?" said Robert; but Cyril couldn't. You see, he felt
in his heart that if there _should_ be Indians they would be entirely
his own fault, so he did not wish to believe in them. And trying not to
believe things when in your heart you are almost sure they are true, is
as bad for the temper as anything I know.

"It's simply idiotic," he said, "talking about Indians, when you can see
for yourself that it's Jane who's got her wish. Look what a fine day it
is----_OH!_--"

He had turned towards the window to point out the fineness of the
day--the others turned too--and a frozen silence caught at Cyril, and
none of the others felt at all like breaking it. For there, peering
round the corner of the window, among the red leaves of the Virginia
creeper, was a face--a brown face, with a long nose and a tight mouth
and very bright eyes. And the face was painted in coloured patches. It
had long black hair, and in the hair were feathers!

Every child's mouth in the room opened, and stayed open. The pudding was
growing white and cold on their plates. No one could move.

Suddenly the feathered head was cautiously withdrawn, and the spell was
broken. I am sorry to say that Anthea's first words were very like a
girl.

"There, now!" she said. "I told you so!"

The pudding had now definitely ceased to charm. Hastily wrapping their
portions in a _Spectator_ of the week before the week before last, they
hid them behind the crinkled paper stove-ornament, and fled upstairs to
reconnoitre and to hold a hurried council.

"Pax," said Cyril handsomely when they reached their mother's bedroom.
"Panther, I'm sorry if I was a brute."

"All right," said Anthea; "but you see now!"

No further trace of Indians, however, could be discerned from the
windows.

"Well," said Robert, "what are we to do?"

"The only thing I can think of," said Anthea, who was now generally
admitted to be the heroine of the day, "is--if we dressed up as like
Indians as we can, and looked out of the windows, or even went out. They
might think we were the powerful leaders of a large neighbouring tribe,
and--and not do anything to us, you know, for fear of awful vengeance."

"But Eliza, and the cook?" said Jane.

"You forget--they can't notice anything," said Robert. "They wouldn't
notice anything out of the way, even if they were scalped or roasted at
a slow fire."

"But would they come right at sunset?"

"Of course. You can't be really scalped or burned to death without
noticing it, and you'd be sure to notice it next day, even if it escaped
your attention at the time," said Cyril. "I think Anthea's right, but we
shall want a most awful lot of feathers."

"I'll go down to the hen-house," said Robert. "There's one of the
turkeys in there--it's not very well. I could cut its feathers without
it minding much. It's very bad--doesn't seem to care what happens to it.
Get me the cutting-out scissors."

Earnest reconnoitring convinced them all that no Indians were in the
poultry-yard. Robert went. In five minutes he came back--pale, but with
many feathers.

"Look here," he said, "this is jolly serious. I cut off the feathers,
and when I turned to come out there was an Indian squinting at me from
under the old hen-coop. I just brandished the feathers and yelled, and
got away before he could get the coop off top of himself. Panther, get
the coloured blankets off our beds, and look slippy, can't you?"

It is wonderful how like an Indian you can make yourself with blankets
and feathers and coloured scarves. Of course none of the children
happened to have long black hair, but there was a lot of black calico
that had been bought to cover school-books with. They cut strips of this
into a sort of fine fringe, and fastened it round their heads with the
amber-coloured ribbons off the girls' Sunday dresses. Then they stuck
turkeys' feathers in the ribbons. The calico looked very like long black
hair, especially when the strips began to curl up a bit.

"But our faces," said Anthea, "they're not at all the right colour.
We're all rather pale, and I'm sure I don't know why, but Cyril is the
colour of putty."

"I'm not," said Cyril.

"The real Indians outside seem to be brownish," said Robert hastily. "I
think we ought to be really _red_--it's sort of superior to have a red
skin, if you are one."

The red ochre cook uses for the kitchen bricks seemed to be about the
reddest thing in the house. The children mixed some in a saucer with
milk, as they had seen cook do for the kitchen floor. Then they
carefully painted each other's faces and hands with it, till they were
quite as red as any Red Indian need be--if not redder.

They knew at once that they must look very terrible when they met Eliza
in the passage, and she screamed aloud. This unsolicited testimonial
pleased them very much. Hastily telling her not to be a goose, and that
it was only a game, the four blanketed, feathered, really and truly
Redskins went boldly out to meet the foe. I say boldly. That is because
I wish to be polite. At any rate, they went.

Along the hedge dividing the wilderness from the garden was a row of
dark heads, all highly feathered.

"It's our only chance," whispered Anthea. "Much better than to wait for
their blood-freezing attack. We must pretend like mad. Like that game of
cards where you pretend you've got aces when you haven't. Fluffing they
call it, I think. Now then. Whoop!"

With four wild war-whoops--or as near them as white children could be
expected to go without any previous practice--they rushed through the
gate and struck four war-like attitudes in face of the line of Red
Indians. These were all about the same height, and that height was
Cyril's.

"I hope to goodness they can talk English," said Cyril through his
attitude.

Anthea knew they could, though she never knew how she came to know it.
She had a white towel tied to a walking-stick. This was a flag of truce,
and she waved it, in the hope that the Indians would know what it was.
Apparently they did--for one who was browner than the others stepped
forward.

"Ye seek a pow-wow?" he said in excellent English. "I am Golden Eagle,
of the mighty tribe of Rock-dwellers."

[Illustration: "Ye seek a pow-wow?" he said]

"And I," said Anthea, with a sudden inspiration, "am the Black
Panther--chief of the--the--the--Mazawattee tribe. My brothers--I don't
mean--yes, I do--the tribe--I mean the Mazawattees--are in ambush below
the brow of yonder hill."

"And what mighty warriors be these?" asked Golden Eagle, turning to the
others.

Cyril said he was the great chief Squirrel, of the Moning Congo tribe,
and, seeing that Jane was sucking her thumb and could evidently think of
no name for herself, he added, "This great warrior is Wild Cat--Pussy
Ferox we call it in this land--leader of the vast Phiteezi tribe."

"And thou, valorous Redskin?" Golden Eagle inquired suddenly of Robert,
who, taken unawares, could only reply that he was Bobs--leader of the
Cape Mounted Police.

"And now," said Black Panther, "our tribes, if we just whistle them up,
will far outnumber your puny forces; so resistance is useless. Return,
therefore, to your land, O brother, and smoke pipes of peace in your
wampums with your squaws and your medicine-men, and dress yourselves in
the gayest wigwams, and eat happily of the juicy fresh-caught
moccasins."

"You've got it all wrong," murmured Cyril angrily. But Golden Eagle only
looked inquiringly at her.

"Thy customs are other than ours, O Black Panther," he said. "Bring up
thy tribe, that we may hold pow-wow in state before them, as becomes
great chiefs."

"We'll bring them up right enough," said Anthea, "with their bows and
arrows, and tomahawks and scalping-knives, and everything you can think
of, if you don't look sharp and go."

She spoke bravely enough, but the hearts of all the children were
beating furiously, and their breath came in shorter and shorter gasps.
For the little real Red Indians were closing up round them--coming
nearer and nearer with angry murmurs--so that they were the centre of a
crowd of dark cruel faces.

"It's no go," whispered Robert. "I knew it wouldn't be. We must make a
bolt for the Psammead. It might help us. If it doesn't--well, I suppose
we shall come alive again at sunset. I wonder if scalping hurts as much
as they say."

"I'll wave the flag again," said Anthea. "If they stand back, we'll run
for it."

She waved the towel, and the chief commanded his followers to stand
back. Then, charging wildly at the place where the line of Indians was
thinnest, the four children started to run. Their first rush knocked
down some half-dozen Indians, over whose blanketed bodies the children
leaped, and made straight for the sand-pit. This was no time for the
safe easy way by which carts go down--right over the edge of the
sand-pit they went, among the yellow and pale purple flowers and dried
grasses, past the little bank martins' little front doors, skipping,
clinging, bounding, stumbling, sprawling, and finally rolling.

Yellow Eagle and his followers came up with them just at the very spot
where they had seen the Psammead that morning.

Breathless and beaten, the wretched children now awaited their fate.
Sharp knives and axes gleamed round them, but worse than these was the
cruel light in the eyes of Golden Eagle and his followers.

"Ye have lied to us, O Black Panther of the Mazawattees--and thou, too,
Squirrel of the Moning Congos. These also, Pussy Ferox of the Phiteezi,
and Bobs of the Cape Mounted Police,--these also have lied to us, if not
with their tongues, yet by their silence. Ye have lied under the cover
of the Truce-flag of the Pale-face. Ye have no followers. Your tribes
are far away--following the hunting trail. What shall be their doom?" he
concluded, turning with a bitter smile to the other Red Indians.

"Build we the fire!" shouted his followers; and at once a dozen ready
volunteers started to look for fuel. The four children, each held
between two strong little Indians, cast despairing glances round them.
Oh, if they could only see the Psammead!

"Do you mean to scalp us first and then roast us?" asked Anthea
desperately.

"Of course!" Redskin opened his eyes at her. "It's always done."

The Indians had formed a ring round the children, and now sat on the
ground gazing at their captives. There was a threatening silence.

Then slowly, by twos and threes, the Indians who had gone to look for
firewood came back, and they came back empty-handed. They had not been
able to find a single stick of wood for a fire! No one ever can, as a
matter of fact, in that part of Kent.

The children drew a deep breath of relief, but it ended in a moan of
terror. For bright knives were being brandished all about them. Next
moment each child was seized by an Indian; each closed its eyes and
tried not to scream. They waited for the sharp agony of the knife. It
did not come. Next moment they were released, and fell in a trembling
heap. Their heads did not hurt at all. They only felt strangely cool!
Wild war-whoops rang in their ears. When they ventured to open their
eyes they saw four of their foes dancing round them with wild leaps and
screams, and each of the four brandished in his hand a scalp of long
flowing black hair. They put their hands to their heads--their own
scalps were safe! The poor untutored savages had indeed scalped the
children. But they had only, so to speak, scalped them of the black
calico ringlets!

[Illustration: Bright knives were being brandished all about them]

The children fell into each other's arms, sobbing and laughing.

"Their scalps are ours," chanted the chief; "ill-rooted were their
ill-fated hairs! They came off in the hands of the victors--without
struggle, without resistance, they yielded their scalps to the
conquering Rock-dwellers! Oh, how little a thing is a scalp so lightly
won!"

"They'll take our real ones in a minute; you see if they don't," said
Robert, trying to rub some of the red ochre off his face and hands on to
his hair.

"Cheated of our just and fiery revenge are we," the chant went on,--"but
there are other torments than the scalping-knife and the flames. Yet is
the slow fire the correct thing. O strange unnatural country, wherein a
man may find no wood to burn his enemy!--Ah for the boundless forests of
my native land, where the great trees for thousands of miles grow but to
furnish firewood wherewithal to burn our foes. Ah, would we were but in
our native forest once more!"

Suddenly like a flash of lightning, the golden gravel shone all round
the four children instead of the dusky figures. For every single
Indian had vanished on the instant at their leader's word. The Psammead
must have been there all the time. And it had given the Indian chief his
wish.

       *       *       *       *       *

Martha brought home a jug with a pattern of storks and long grasses on
it. Also she brought back all Anthea's money.

"My cousin, she gave me the jug for luck; she said it was an odd one
what the basin of had got smashed."

"Oh, Martha, you are a dear!" sighed Anthea, throwing her arms round
her.

"Yes," giggled Martha, "you'd better make the most of me while you've
got me. I shall give your ma notice directly minute she comes back."

"Oh, Martha, we haven't been so _very_ horrid to you, have we?" asked
Anthea, aghast.

"Oh, it isn't that, miss." Martha giggled more than ever. "I'm a-goin'
to be married. It's Beale the gamekeeper. He's been a-proposin' to me
off and on ever since you come home from the clergyman's where you got
locked up on the church-tower. And to-day I said the word an' made him a
happy man."

       *       *       *       *       *

Anthea put the seven-and-fourpence back in the missionary-box, and
pasted paper over the place where the poker had broken it. She was very
glad to be able to do this, and she does not know to this day whether
breaking open a missionary-box is or is not a hanging matter!




CHAPTER XI (AND LAST)

THE LAST WISH


Of course you, who see above that this is the eleventh (and last)
chapter, know very well that the day of which this chapter tells must be
the last on which Cyril, Anthea, Robert, and Jane will have a chance of
getting anything out of the Psammead, or Sand-fairy.

But the children themselves did not know this. They were full of rosy
visions, and, whereas on the other days they had often found it
extremely difficult to think of anything really nice to wish for, their
brains were now full of the most beautiful and sensible ideas. "This,"
as Jane remarked afterwards, "is always the way." Everyone was up extra
early that morning, and these plans were hopefully discussed in the
garden before breakfast. The old idea of one hundred pounds in modern
florins was still first favourite, but there were others that ran it
close--the chief of these being the "pony-each" idea. This had a great
advantage. You could wish for a pony each during the morning, ride it
all day, have it vanish at sunset, and wish it back again next day.
Which would be an economy of litter and stabling. But at breakfast two
things happened. First, there was a letter from mother. Granny was
better, and mother and father hoped to be home that very afternoon. A
cheer arose. And of course this news at once scattered all the
before-breakfast wish-ideas. For everyone saw quite plainly that the
wish of the day must be something to please mother and not to please
themselves.

"I wonder what she _would_ like," pondered Cyril.

"She'd like us all to be good," said Jane primly.

"Yes--but that's so dull for us," Cyril rejoined; "and besides, I should
hope we could be that without sand-fairies to help us. No; it must be
something splendid, that we couldn't possibly get without wishing for."

"Look out," said Anthea in a warning voice; "don't forget yesterday.
Remember, we get our wishes now just wherever we happen to be when we
say 'I wish.' Don't let's let ourselves in for anything silly--to-day of
all days."

"All right," said Cyril. "You needn't talk so much."

Just then Martha came in with a jug full of hot water for the
tea-pot--and a face full of importance for the children.

"A blessing we're all alive to eat our breakfast!" she said darkly.

"Why, whatever's happened?" everybody asked.

"Oh, nothing," said Martha, "only it seems nobody's safe from being
murdered in their beds nowadays."

"Why," said Jane as an agreeable thrill of horror ran down her back and
legs and out at her toes, "_has_ anyone been murdered in their beds?"

"Well--not exactly," said Martha; "but they might just as well. There's
been burglars over at Peasemarsh Place--Beale's just told me--and
they've took every single one of Lady Chittenden's diamonds and jewels
and things, and she's a-goin out of one fainting fit into another, with
hardly time to say 'Oh, my diamonds!' in between. And Lord Chittenden's
away in London."

"Lady Chittenden," said Anthea; "we've seen her. She wears a
red-and-white dress, and she has no children of her own and can't abide
other folkses'."

"That's her," said Martha. "Well, she's put all her trust in riches, and
you see how she's served. They say the diamonds and things was worth
thousands of pounds. There was a necklace and a river--whatever that
is--and no end of bracelets; and a tarrer and ever so many rings. But
there, I mustn't stand talking and all the place to clean down afore
your ma comes home."

"I don't see why she should ever have had such lots of diamonds," said
Anthea when Martha had flounced off. "She was not at all a nice lady, I
thought. And mother hasn't any diamonds, and hardly any jewels--the
topaz necklace, and the sapphire ring daddy gave her when they were
engaged, and the garnet star, and the little pearl brooch with
great-grandpapa's hair in it,--that's about all."

"When I'm grown up I'll buy mother no end of diamonds," said Robert, "if
she wants them. I shall make so much money exploring in Africa I shan't
know what to do with it."

"Wouldn't it be jolly," said Jane dreamily, "if mother could find all
these lovely things, necklaces and rivers of diamonds and tarrers?"

"_Ti--aras_," said Cyril.

"Ti--aras, then,--and rings and everything in her room when she came
home. I wish she would"--

The others gazed at her in horror.

"Well, she _will_," said Robert; "you've wished, my good Jane--and our
only chance now is to find the Psammead, and if it's in a good temper
it _may_ take back the wish and give us another. If not--well--goodness
knows what we're in for!--the police of course, and---- Don't cry,
silly! We'll stand by you. Father says we need never to be afraid if we
don't do anything wrong and always speak the truth."

But Cyril and Anthea exchanged gloomy glances. They remembered how
convincing the truth about the Psammead had been once before when told
to the police.

It was a day of misfortunes. Of course the Psammead could not be found.
Nor the jewels, though every one of the children searched the mother's
room again and again.

"Of course," Robert said, "_we_ couldn't find them. It'll be mother
who'll do that. Perhaps she'll think they've been in the house for years
and years, and never know they are the stolen ones at all."

"Oh yes!" Cyril was very scornful; "then mother will be a receiver of
stolen goods, and you know jolly well what _that's_ worse than."

Another and exhaustive search of the sand-pit failed to reveal the
Psammead, so the children went back to the house slowly and sadly.

"I don't care," said Anthea stoutly, "we'll tell mother the truth, and
she'll give back the jewels--and make everything all right."

"Do you think so?" said Cyril slowly. "Do you think she'll believe us?
Could anyone believe about a Sammyadd unless they'd seen it? She'll
think we're pretending. Or else she'll think we're raving mad, and then
we shall be sent to the mad-house. How would you like it?"--he turned
suddenly on the miserable Jane,--"how would you like it, to be shut up
in an iron cage with bars and padded walls, and nothing to do but stick
straws in your hair all day, and listen to the howlings and ravings of
the other maniacs? Make up your minds to it, all of you. It's no use
telling mother."

"But it's true," said Jane.

"Of course it is, but it's not true enough for grown-up people to
believe it," said Anthea.

"Cyril's right. Let's put flowers in all the vases, and try not to think
about the diamonds. After all, everything has come right in the end all
the other times."

So they filled all the pots they could find with flowers--asters and
zinnias, and loose-leaved late red roses from the wall of the
stableyard, till the house was a perfect bower.

And almost as soon as dinner was cleared away mother arrived, and was
clasped in eight loving arms. It was very difficult indeed not to tell
her all about the Psammead at once, because they had got into the habit
of telling her everything. But they did succeed in not telling her.

[Illustration: She was clasped in eight loving arms]

Mother, on her side, had plenty to tell them--about Granny, and Granny's
pigeons, and Auntie Emma's lame tame donkey. She was very delighted with
the flowery-boweryness of the house; and everything seemed so natural
and pleasant, now that she was home again, that the children almost
thought they must have dreamed the Psammead.

But, when mother moved towards the stairs to go up to her bedroom and
take off her bonnet, the eight arms clung round her just as if she only
had two children, one the Lamb and the other an octopus.

"Don't go up, mummy darling," said Anthea; "let me take your things up
for you."

"Or I will," said Cyril.

"We want you to come and look at the rose-tree," said Robert.

"Oh, don't go up!" said Jane helplessly.

"Nonsense, dears," said mother briskly, "I'm not such an old woman yet
that I can't take my bonnet off in the proper place. Besides I must wash
these black hands of mine."

So up she went, and the children, following her, exchanged glances of
gloomy foreboding.

Mother took off her bonnet,--it was a very pretty hat, really, with
white roses in it,--and when she had taken it off she went to the
dressing-table to do her pretty hair.

On the table between the ring-stand and the pin-cushion lay a green
leather case. Mother opened it.

"Oh, how lovely!" she cried. It was a ring, a large pearl with shining
many-lighted diamonds set round it. "Wherever did this come from?"
mother asked, trying it on her wedding finger, which it fitted
beautifully. "However did it come here?"

"I don't know," said each of the children truthfully.

"Father must have told Martha to put it here," mother said. "I'll run
down and ask her."

"Let me look at it," said Anthea, who knew Martha would not be able to
see the ring. But when Martha was asked, of course she denied putting
the ring there, and so did Eliza and cook.

Mother came back to her bedroom, very much interested and pleased about
the ring. But, when she opened the dressing-table drawer and found a
long case containing an almost priceless diamond necklace, she was more
interested still, though not so pleased. In the wardrobe, when she went
to put away her "bonnet," she found a tiara and several brooches, and
the rest of the jewellery turned up in various parts of the room during
the next half-hour. The children looked more and more uncomfortable, and
now Jane began to sniff.

Mother looked at her gravely.

"Jane," she said, "I am sure you know something about this. Now think
before you speak, and tell me the truth."

"We found a Fairy," said Jane obediently.

[Illustration: "We found a Fairy," said Jane obediently]

"No nonsense, please," said her mother sharply.

"Don't be silly, Jane," Cyril interrupted. Then he went on desperately.
"Look here, mother, we've never seen the things before, but Lady
Chittenden at Peasmarsh Place lost all her jewellery by wicked burglars
last night. Could this possibly be it?"

All drew a deep breath. They were saved.

"But how could they have put it here? And why should they?" asked
mother, not unreasonably. "Surely it would have been easier and safer to
make off with it?"

"Suppose," said Cyril, "they thought it better to wait for--for
sunset--nightfall, I mean, before they went off with it. No one but us
knew that you were coming back to-day."

"I must send for the police at once," said mother distractedly. "Oh, how
I wish daddy were here!"

"Wouldn't it be better to wait till he _does_ come?" asked Robert,
knowing that his father would not be home before sunset.

"No, no; I can't wait a minute with all this on my mind," cried mother.
"All this" was the heap of jewel-cases on the bed. They put them all in
the wardrobe, and mother locked it. Then mother called Martha.

"Martha," she said, "has any stranger been into my room since I've been
away? Now, answer me truthfully."

"No, mum," answered Martha; "leastways, what I mean to say"--

She stopped.

"Come," said her mistress kindly, "I see someone has. You must tell me
at once. Don't be frightened. I'm sure _you_ haven't done anything
wrong."

Martha burst into heavy sobs.

"I was a-goin' to give you warning this very day, mum, to leave at the
end of my month, so I was,--on account of me being going to make a
respectable young man happy. A gamekeeper he is by trade, mum--and I
wouldn't deceive you--of the name of Beale. And it's as true as I stand
here, it was your coming home in such a hurry, and no warning given, out
of the kindness of his heart it was, as he says, 'Martha, my beauty,' he
says,--which I ain't, and never was, but you know how them men will go
on,--'I can't see you a-toiling and a-moiling and not lend a 'elping
'and; which mine is a strong arm, and it's yours Martha, my dear,' says
he. And so he helped me a-cleanin' of the windows--but outside, mum, the
whole time, and me in; if I never say another breathing word it's gospel
truth."

"Were you with him the whole time?" asked her mistress.

"Him outside and me in, I was," said Martha; "except for fetching up a
fresh pail and the leather that that slut of a Eliza'd hidden away
behind the mangle."

"That will do," said the children's mother. "I am not pleased with you,
Martha, but you have spoken the truth, and that counts for something."

When Martha had gone, the children clung round their mother.

"Oh, mummy darling," cried Anthea, "it isn't Beale's fault, it isn't
really! He's a great dear; he is, truly and honourably, and as honest as
the day. Don't let the police take him, mummy! Oh, don't, don't, don't!"

It was truly awful. Here was an innocent man accused of robbery through
that silly wish of Jane's, and it was absolutely useless to tell the
truth. All longed to, but they thought of the straws in the hair and the
shrieks of the other frantic maniacs, and they could not do it.

"Is there a cart hereabouts?" asked the mother feverishly. "A trap of
any sort? I must drive in to Rochester and tell the police at once."

All the children sobbed, "There's a cart at the farm, but, oh, don't
go!--don't go!--oh, don't go!--wait till daddy comes home!"

Mother took not the faintest notice. When she had set her mind on a
thing she always went straight through with it; she was rather like
Anthea in this respect.

"Look here, Cyril," she said, sticking on her hat with long sharp
violet-headed pins, "I leave you in charge. Stay in the dressing-room.
You can pretend to be swimming boats in the bath, or something. Say I
gave you leave. But stay there, with the door on the landing open; I've
locked the other. And don't let anyone go into my room. Remember, no one
knows the jewels are there except me, and all of you, and the wicked
thieves who put them there. Robert, you stay in the garden and watch the
windows. If anyone tries to get in you must run and tell the two farm
men that I'll send up to wait in the kitchen. I'll tell them there are
dangerous characters about--that's true enough. Now remember, I trust
you both. But I don't think they'll try it till after dark, so you're
quite safe. Good-bye, darlings."

And she locked her bedroom door and went off with the key in her pocket.

The children could not help admiring the dashing and decided way in
which she had acted. They thought how useful she would have been in
organising escape from some of the tight places in which they had found
themselves of late in consequence of their ill-timed wishes.

"She's a born general," said Cyril,--"but _I_ don't know what's going to
happen to us. Even if the girls were to hunt for that old Sammyadd and
find it, and get it to take the jewels away again, mother would only
think we hadn't looked out properly and let the burglars sneak in and
get them--or else the police will think _we've_ got them--or else that
she's been fooling them. Oh, it's a pretty decent average ghastly mess
this time, and no mistake!"

He savagely made a paper boat and began to float it in the bath, as he
had been told to do.

Robert went into the garden and sat down on the worn yellow grass, with
his miserable head between his helpless hands.

Anthea and Jane whispered together in the passage downstairs, where the
cocoanut matting was--with the hole in it that you always caught your
foot in if you were not careful. Martha's voice could be heard in the
kitchen,--grumbling loud and long.

"It's simply quite too dreadfully awful," said Anthea. "How do you know
all the diamonds are there, too? If they aren't, the police will think
mother and father have got them, and that they've only given up some of
them for a kind of desperate blind. And they'll be put in prison, and we
shall be branded outcasts, the children of felons. And it won't be at
all nice for father and mother either," she added, by a candid
after-thought.

"But what can we _do_?" asked Jane.

"Nothing--at least we might look for the Psammead again. It's a very,
_very_ hot day. He may have come out to warm that whisker of his."

"He won't give us any more beastly wishes to-day," said Jane flatly. "He
gets crosser and crosser every time we see him. I believe he hates
having to give wishes."

Anthea had been shaking her head gloomily--now she stopped shaking it so
suddenly that it really looked as though she were pricking up her ears.

"What is it?" asked Jane. "Oh, have you thought of something?"

"Our one chance," cried Anthea dramatically; "the last lone-lorn forlorn
hope. Come on."

At a brisk trot she led the way to the sand-pit. Oh, joy!--there was the
Psammead, basking in a golden sandy hollow and preening its whiskers
happily in the glowing afternoon sun. The moment it saw them it whisked
round and began to burrow--it evidently preferred its own company to
theirs. But Anthea was too quick for it. She caught it by its furry
shoulders gently but firmly, and held it.

"Here--none of that!" said the Psammead. "Leave go of me, will you?"

But Anthea held him fast.

"Dear kind darling Sammyadd," she said breathlessly.

"Oh yes--it's all very well," it said; "you want another wish, I expect.
But I can't keep on slaving from morning till night giving people their
wishes. I must have _some_ time to myself."

"Do you hate giving wishes?" asked Anthea gently, and her voice trembled
with excitement.

"Of course I do," it said. "Leave go of me or I'll bite!--I really
will--I mean it. Oh, well, if you choose to risk it."

Anthea risked it and held on.

"Look here," she said, "don't bite me--listen to reason. If you'll only
do what we want to-day, we'll never ask you for another wish as long as
we live."

The Psammead was much moved.

"I'd do anything," it said in a tearful voice. "I'd almost burst myself
to give you one wish after another, as long as I held out, if you'd only
never, never ask me to do it after to-day. If you knew how I hate to
blow myself out with other people's wishes, and how frightened I am
always that I shall strain a muscle or something. And then to wake up
every morning and know you've _got_ to do it. You don't know what it
is--you don't know what it is, you don't!" Its voice cracked with
emotion, and the last "don't" was a squeak.

Anthea set it down gently on the sand.

"It's all over now," she said soothingly. "We promise faithfully never
to ask for another wish after to-day."

"Well, go ahead," said the Psammead; "let's get it over."

"How many can you do?"

"I don't know--as long as I can hold out."

"Well, first, I wish Lady Chittenden may find she's never lost her
jewels."

The Psammead blew itself out, collapsed, and said, "Done."

"I wish," said Anthea more slowly, "mother mayn't get to the police."

"Done," said the creature after the proper interval.

"I wish," said Jane suddenly, "mother could forget all about the
diamonds."

"Done," said the Psammead; but its voice was weaker.

"Would you like to rest a little?" asked Anthea considerately.

"Yes, please," said the Psammead; "and, before we go any further, will
you wish something for me?"

"Can't you do wishes for yourself?"

"Of course not," it said; "we were always expected to give each other
our wishes--not that we had any to speak of in the good old Megatherium
days. Just wish, will you, that you may never be able, any of you, to
tell anyone a word about _Me_."

"Why?" asked Jane.

"Why, don't you see, if you told grown-ups I should have no peace of my
life. They'd get hold of me, and they wouldn't wish silly things like
you do, but real earnest things; and the scientific people would hit on
some way of making things last after sunset, as likely as not; and
they'd ask for a graduated income-tax, and old-age pensions, and manhood
suffrage, and free secondary education, and dull things like that; and
get them, and keep them, and the whole world would be turned
topsy-turvy. Do wish it! Quick!"

Anthea repeated the Psammead's wish, and it blew itself out to a larger
size than they had yet seen it attain.

"And now," it said as it collapsed, "can I do anything more for you?"

"Just one thing; and I think that clears everything up, doesn't it,
Jane? I wish Martha to forget about the diamond ring, and mother to
forget about the keeper cleaning the windows."

"It's like the 'Brass Bottle,'" said Jane.

"Yes, I'm glad we read that or I should never have thought of it."

"Now," said the Psammead faintly, "I'm almost worn out. Is there
anything else?"

"No; only thank you kindly for all you've done for us, and I hope you'll
have a good long sleep, and I hope we shall see you again some day."

"Is that a wish?" it said in a weak voice.

"Yes, please," said the two girls together.

[Illustration: It burrowed, and disappeared, scratching fiercely to the
last]

Then for the last time in this story they saw the Psammead blow itself
out and collapse suddenly. It nodded to them, blinked its long snail's
eyes, burrowed, and disappeared, scratching fiercely to the last, and
the sand closed over it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I hope we've done right?" said Jane.

"I'm sure we have," said Anthea. "Come on home and tell the boys."

Anthea found Cyril glooming over his paper boats, and told him. Jane
told Robert. The two tales were only just ended when mother walked in,
hot and dusty. She explained that as she was being driven into Rochester
to buy the girls' autumn school-dresses the axle had broken, and but for
the narrowness of the lane and the high soft hedges she would have been
thrown out. As it was, she was not hurt, but she had had to walk home.
"And oh, my dearest dear chicks," she said, "I am simply dying for a cup
of tea! Do run and see if the water boils!"

"So you see it's all right," Jane whispered. "She doesn't remember."

"No more does Martha," said Anthea, who had been to ask after the state
of the kettle.

As the servants sat at their tea, Beale the gamekeeper dropped in. He
brought the welcome news that Lady Chittenden's diamonds had not been
lost at all. Lord Chittenden had taken them to be re-set and cleaned,
and the maid who knew about it had gone for a holiday. So that was all
right.

"I wonder if we ever shall see the Psammead again," said Jane wistfully
as they walked in the garden, while mother was putting the Lamb to bed.

"I'm sure we shall," said Cyril, "if you really wished it."

"We've promised never to ask it for another wish," said Anthea.

"I never want to," said Robert earnestly.

They did see it again, of course, but not in this story. And it was not
in a sand-pit either, but in a very, very, very different place. It was
in a---- But I must say no more.

I. The Book of Beasts


He happened to be building a Palace when the news came, and he left all
the bricks kicking about the floor for Nurse to clear up--but then the
news was rather remarkable news. You see, there was a knock at the front
door and voices talking downstairs, and Lionel thought it was the man
come to see about the gas, which had not been allowed to be lighted
since the day when Lionel made a swing by tying his skipping rope to the
gas bracket.

And then, quite suddenly, Nurse came in and said, "Master Lionel, dear,
they've come to fetch you to go and be King."

Then she made haste to change his smock and to wash his face and hands
and brush his hair, and all the time she was doing it Lionel kept
wriggling and fidgeting and saying, "Oh, don't, Nurse," and, "I'm sure
my ears are quite clean," or, "Never mind my hair, it's all right," and,
"That'll do."

"You're going on as if you was going to be an eel instead of a King,"
said Nurse.

The minute Nurse let go for a moment Lionel bolted off without waiting
for his clean handkerchief, and in the drawing room there were two very
grave-looking gentlemen in red robes with fur, and gold coronets with
velvet sticking up out of the middle like the cream in the very
expensive jam tarts.

They bowed low to Lionel, and the gravest one said: "Sire, your
great-great-great-great-great-grandfather, the King of this country, is
dead, and now you have got to come and be King."

"Yes, please, sir," said Lionel, "when does it begin?"

"You will be crowned this afternoon," said the grave gentleman who was
not quite so grave-looking as the other.

"Would you like me to bring Nurse, or what time would you like me to be
fetched, and hadn't I better put on my velvet suit with the lace
collar?" said Lionel, who had often been out to tea.

"Your Nurse will be removed to the Palace later. No, never mind about
changing your suit; the Royal robes will cover all that up."

The grave gentlemen led the way to a coach with eight white horses,
which was drawn up in front of the house where Lionel lived. It was No.
7, on the left-hand side of the street as you go up.

Lionel ran upstairs at the last minute, and he kissed Nurse and said:
"Thank you for washing me. I wish I'd let you do the other ear.
No--there's no time now. Give me the hanky. Good-bye, Nurse."

"Good-bye, ducky," said Nurse. "Be a good little King now, and say
'please' and 'thank you,' and remember to pass the cake to the little
girls, and don't have more than two helps of anything."

So off went Lionel to be made a King. He had never expected to be a King
any more than you have, so it was all quite new to him--so new that he
had never even thought of it. And as the coach went through the town he
had to bite his tongue to be quite sure it was real, because if his
tongue was real it showed he wasn't dreaming. Half an hour before he had
been building with bricks in the nursery; and now--the streets were all
fluttering with flags; every window was crowded with people waving
handkerchiefs and scattering flowers; there were scarlet soldiers
everywhere along the pavements, and all the bells of all the churches
were ringing like mad, and like a great song to the music of their
ringing he heard thousands of people shouting, "Long live Lionel! Long
live our little King!"

He was a little sorry at first that he had not put on his best clothes,
but he soon forgot to think about that. If he had been a girl he would
very likely have bothered about it the whole time.

As they went along, the grave gentlemen, who were the Chancellor and the
Prime Minister, explained the things which Lionel did not understand.

"I thought we were a Republic," said Lionel. "I'm sure there hasn't been
a King for some time."

"Sire, your great-great-great-great-great-grandfather's death happened
when my grandfather was a little boy," said the Prime Minister, "and
since then your loyal people have been saving up to buy you a crown--so
much a week, you know, according to people's means--sixpence a week from
those who have first-rate pocket money, down to a halfpenny a week from
those who haven't so much. You know it's the rule that the crown must be
paid for by the people."

"But hadn't my great-great-however-much-it-is-grandfather a crown?"

"Yes, but he sent it to be tinned over, for fear of vanity, and he had
had all the jewels taken out, and sold them to buy books. He was a
strange man; a very good King he was, but he had his faults--he was fond
of books. Almost with his last breath he sent the crown to be
tinned--and he never lived to pay the tinsmith's bill."

Here the Prime Minister wiped away a tear, and just then the carriage
stopped and Lionel was taken out of the carriage to be crowned. Being
crowned is much more tiring work than you would suppose, and by the time
it was over, and Lionel had worn the Royal robes for an hour or two and
had had his hand kissed by everybody whose business it was to do it, he
was quite worn out, and was very glad to get into the Palace nursery.

Nurse was there, and tea was ready: seedy cake and plummy cake, and jam
and hot buttered toast, and the prettiest china with red and gold and
blue flowers on it, and real tea, and as many cups of it as you liked.

After tea Lionel said: "I think I should like a book. Will you get me
one, Nurse?"

"Bless the child," said Nurse. "You don't suppose you've lost the use of
your legs with just being a King? Run along, do, and get your books
yourself."

So Lionel went down into the library. The Prime Minister and the
Chancellor were there, and when Lionel came in they bowed very low, and
were beginning to ask Lionel most politely what on earth he was coming
bothering for now--when Lionel cried out: "Oh, what a worldful of books!
Are they yours?"

"They are yours, Your Majesty," answered the Chancellor. "They were the
property of the late King, your great-great--"

"Yes, I know," Lionel interrupted. "Well, I shall read them all. I love
to read. I am so glad I learned to read."

"If I might venture to advise Your Majesty," said the Prime Minister, "I
should not read these books. Your great--"

"Yes?" said Lionel, quickly.

"He was a very good King--oh, yes, really a very superior King in his
way, but he was a little--well, strange."

"Mad?" asked Lionel, cheerfully.

"No, no"--both the gentlemen were sincerely shocked. "Not mad; but if I
may express it so, he was--er--too clever by half. And I should not like
a little King of mine to have anything to do with his books."

Lionel looked puzzled.

"The fact is," the Chancellor went on, twisting his red beard in an
agitated way, "your great--"

"Go on," said Lionel.

"--was called a wizard."

"But he wasn't?"

"Of course not--a most worthy King was your great--"

"I see."

"But I wouldn't touch his books."

"Just this one," cried Lionel, laying his hands on the cover of a great
brown book that lay on the study table. It had gold patterns on the
brown leather, and gold clasps with turquoises and rubies in the twists
of them, and gold corners, so that the leather should not wear out too
quickly.

"I must look at this one," Lionel said, for on the back in big letters
he read: _The Book of Beasts_.

The Chancellor said, "Don't be a silly little King."

But Lionel had got the gold clasps undone, and he opened the first page,
and there was a beautiful Butterfly all red, and brown, and yellow, and
blue, so beautifully painted that it looked as if it were alive.

"There," said Lionel, "Isn't that lovely? Why--"

But as he spoke the beautiful Butterfly fluttered its many-colored wings
on the yellow old page of the book, and flew up and out of the window.

"Well!" said the Prime Minister, as soon as he could speak for the lump
of wonder that had got into his throat and tried to choke him, "that's
magic, that is."

But before he had spoken, the King had turned the next page, and there
was a shining bird complete and beautiful in every blue feather of him.
Under him was written, "Blue Bird of Paradise," and while the King gazed
enchanted at the charming picture the Blue Bird fluttered his wings on
the yellow page and spread them and flew out of the book.

Then the Prime Minister snatched the book away from the King and shut it
up on the blank page where the bird had been, and put it on a very high
shelf. And the Chancellor gave the King a good shaking, and said:
"You're a naughty, disobedient little King!" and was very angry indeed.

"I don't see that I've done any harm," said Lionel. He hated being
shaken, as all boys do; he would much rather have been slapped.

"No harm?" said the Chancellor. "Ah--but what do you know about it?
That's the question. How do you know what might have been on the next
page--a snake or a worm, or a centipede or a revolutionist, or
something like that."

"Well, I'm sorry if I've vexed you," said Lionel. "Come, let's kiss and
be friends." So he kissed the Prime Minister, and they settled down for
a nice quiet game of noughts and crosses while the Chancellor went to
add up his accounts.

But when Lionel was in bed he could not sleep for thinking of the book,
and when the full moon was shining with all her might and light he got
up and crept down to the library and climbed up and got _The Book of
Beasts_.

He took it outside to the terrace, where the moonlight was as bright as
day, and he opened the book, and saw the empty pages with "Butterfly"
and "Blue Bird of Paradise" underneath, and then he turned the next
page. There was some sort of red thing sitting under a palm tree, and
under it was written "Dragon." The Dragon did not move, and the King
shut up the book rather quickly and went back to bed.

But the next day he wanted another look, so he took the book out into
the garden, and when he undid the clasps with the rubies and turquoises,
the book opened all by itself at the picture with "Dragon" underneath,
and the sun shone full on the page. And then, quite suddenly, a great
Red Dragon came out of the book and spread vast scarlet wings and flew
away across the garden to the far hills, and Lionel was left with the
empty page before him, for the page was quite empty except for the green
palm tree and the yellow desert, and the little streaks of red where the
paintbrush had gone outside the pencil outline of the Red Dragon.

And then Lionel felt that he had indeed done it. He had not been King
twenty-four hours, and already he had let loose a Red Dragon to worry
his faithful subjects' lives out. And they had been saving up so long to
buy him a crown, and everything!

Lionel began to cry.

[Illustration: "The dragon flew away across the garden." _See page 8._]

The Chancellor and the Prime Minister and the Nurse all came running
to see what was the matter. And when they saw the book they understood,
and the Chancellor said: "You naughty little King! Put him to bed,
Nurse, and let him think over what he's done."

"Perhaps, my Lord," said the Prime Minister, "we'd better first find out
just exactly what he has done."

Then Lionel, in floods of tears, said: "It's a Red Dragon, and it's gone
flying away to the hills, and I am so sorry, and, oh, do forgive me!"

But the Prime Minister and the Chancellor had other things to think of
than forgiving Lionel. They hurried off to consult the police and see
what could be done. Everyone did what they could. They sat on committees
and stood on guard, and lay in wait for the Dragon, but he stayed up in
the hills, and there was nothing more to be done. The faithful Nurse,
meanwhile, did not neglect her duty. Perhaps she did more than anyone
else, for she slapped the King and put him to bed without his tea, and
when it got dark she would not give him a candle to read by.

"You are a naughty little King," she said, "and nobody will love you."

Next day the Dragon was still quiet, though the more poetic of Lionel's
subjects could see the redness of the Dragon shining through the green
trees quite plainly. So Lionel put on his crown and sat on his throne
and said he wanted to make some laws.

And I need hardly say that though the Prime Minister and the Chancellor
and the Nurse might have the very poorest opinion of Lionel's private
judgement, and might even slap him and send him to bed, the minute he
got on his throne and set his crown on his head, he became
infallible--which means that everything he said was right, and that he
couldn't possibly make a mistake. So when he said: "There is to be a law
forbidding people to open books in schools or elsewhere"--he had the
support of at least half of his subjects, and the other half--the
grown-up half--pretended to think he was quite right.

Then he made a law that everyone should always have enough to eat. And
this pleased everyone except the ones who had always had too much.

And when several other nice new laws were made and written down he went
home and made mud-houses and was very happy. And he said to his Nurse:
"People will love me now I've made such a lot of pretty new laws for
them."

But Nurse said: "Don't count your chickens, my dear. You haven't seen
the last of that Dragon yet."

Now, the next day was Saturday. And in the afternoon the Dragon suddenly
swooped down upon the common in all his hideous redness, and carried off
the Soccer Players, umpires, goal-posts, ball, and all.

Then the people were very angry indeed, and they said: "We might as well
be a Republic. After saving up all these years to get his crown, and
everything!"

And wise people shook their heads and foretold a decline in the National
Love of Sport. And, indeed, soccer was not at all popular for some time
afterward.

Lionel did his best to be a good King during the week, and the people
were beginning to forgive him for letting the Dragon out of the book.
"After all," they said, "soccer is a dangerous game, and perhaps it is
wise to discourage it."

Popular opinion held that the Soccer Players, being tough and hard, had
disagreed with the Dragon so much that he had gone away to some place
where they only play cats' cradle and games that do not make you hard
and tough.

All the same, Parliament met on the Saturday afternoon, a convenient
time, for most of the Members would be free to attend, to consider the
Dragon. But unfortunately the Dragon, who had only been asleep, woke up
because it was Saturday, and he considered the Parliament, and
afterwards there were not any Members left, so they tried to make a new
Parliament, but being a member of Parliament had somehow grown as
unpopular as soccer playing, and no one would consent to be elected, so
they had to do without a Parliament. When the next Saturday came around
everyone was a little nervous, but the Red Dragon was pretty quiet that
day and only ate an Orphanage.

Lionel was very, very unhappy. He felt that it was his disobedience that
had brought this trouble on the Parliament and the Orphanage and the
Soccer Players, and he felt that it was his duty to try and do
something. The question was, what?

The Blue Bird that had come out of the book used to sing very nicely in
the Palace rose garden, and the Butterfly was very tame, and would perch
on his shoulder when he walked among the tall lilies: so Lionel saw that
all the creatures in _The Book of Beasts_ could not be wicked, like the
Dragon, and he thought: "Suppose I could get another beast out who would
fight the Dragon?"

So he took _The Book of Beasts_ out into the rose garden and opened the
page next to the one where the Dragon had been just a tiny bit to see
what the name was. He could only see "cora," but he felt the middle of
the page swelling up thick with the creature that was trying to come
out, and it was only by putting the book down and sitting on it
suddenly, very hard, that he managed to get it shut. Then he fastened
the clasps with the rubies and turquoises in them and sent for the
Chancellor, who had been ill since Saturday, and so had not been eaten
with the rest of the Parliament, and he said: "What animal ends in
'cora'?"

The Chancellor answered: "The Manticora, of course."

"What is he like?" asked the King.

"He is the sworn foe of Dragons," said the Chancellor. "He drinks their
blood. He is yellow, with the body of a lion and the face of a man. I
wish we had a few Manticoras here now. But the last died hundreds of
years ago--worse luck!"

Then the King ran and opened the book at the page that had "cora" on it,
and there was the picture--Manticora, all yellow, with a lion's body and
a man's face, just as the Chancellor had said. And under the picture
was written, "Manticora."

In a few minutes the Manticora came sleepily out of the book, rubbing
its eyes with its hands and mewing piteously. It seemed very stupid, and
when Lionel gave it a push and said, "Go along and fight the Dragon,
do," it put its tail between its legs and fairly ran away. It went and
hid behind the Town Hall, and at night when the people were asleep it
went around and ate all the pussy-cats in the town. And then it mewed
more than ever. And on the Saturday morning, when people were a little
timid about going out, because the Dragon had no regular hour for
calling, the Manticora went up and down the streets and drank all the
milk that was left in the cans at the doors for people's teas, and it
ate the cans as well.

And just when it had finished the very last little halfpenny worth,
which was short measure, because the milkman's nerves were quite upset,
the Red Dragon came down the street looking for the Manticora. It edged
off when it saw him coming, for it was not at all the Dragon-fighting
kind; and, seeing no other door open, the poor, hunted creature took
refuge in the General Post Office, and there the Dragon found it, trying
to conceal itself among the ten o'clock mail. The Dragon fell on the
Manticora at once, and the mail was no defense. The mewings were heard
all over the town. All the kitties and the milk the Manticora had had
seemed to have strengthened its mew wonderfully. Then there was a sad
silence, and presently the people whose windows looked that way saw the
Dragon come walking down the steps of the General Post Office spitting
fire and smoke, together with tufts of Manticora fur, and the fragments
of the registered letters. Things were growing very serious. However
popular the King might become during the week, the Dragon was sure to do
something on Saturday to upset the people's loyalty.

[Illustration "The Manticora took refuge in the General Post Office."
_See page 13._]

The Dragon was a perfect nuisance for the whole of Saturday, except
during the hour of noon, and then he had to rest under a tree or he
would have caught fire from the heat of the sun. You see, he was very
hot to begin with.

At last came a Saturday when the Dragon actually walked into the Royal
nursery and carried off the King's own pet Rocking Horse. Then the King
cried for six days, and on the seventh he was so tired that he had to
stop. He heard the Blue Bird singing among the roses and saw the
Butterfly fluttering among the lilies, and he said: "Nurse, wipe my
face, please. I am not going to cry any more."

Nurse washed his face, and told him not to be a silly little King.
"Crying," said she, "never did anyone any good yet."

"I don't know," said the little King, "I seem to see better, and to hear
better now that I've cried for a week. Now, Nurse, dear, I know I'm
right, so kiss me in case I never come back. I _must_ try to see if I
can't save the people."

"Well, if you must, you must," said Nurse, "but don't tear your clothes
or get your feet wet."

So off he went.

The Blue Bird sang more sweetly than ever, and the Butterfly shone more
brightly, as Lionel once more carried _The Book of Beasts_ out into the
rose garden, and opened it--very quickly, so that he might not be afraid
and change his mind. The book fell open wide, almost in the middle, and
there was written at the bottom of the page, "Hippogriff," and before
Lionel had time to see what the picture was, there was a fluttering of
great wings and a stamping of hoofs, and a sweet, soft, friendly
neighing; and there came out of the book a beautiful white horse with a
long, long, white mane and a long, long, white tail, and he had great
wings like swan's wings, and the softest, kindest eyes in the world, and
he stood there among the roses.

The Hippogriff rubbed its silky-soft, milky white nose against the
little King's shoulder, and the little King thought: "But for the wings
you are very like my poor, dear lost Rocking Horse." And the Blue Bird's
song was very loud and sweet.

Then suddenly the King saw coming through the sky the great straggling,
sprawling, wicked shape of the Red Dragon. And he knew at once what he
must do. He caught up _The Book of Beasts_ and jumped on the back of the
gentle, beautiful Hippogriff, and leaning down he whispered in the
sharp, white ear: "Fly, dear Hippogriff, fly your very fastest to the
Pebbly Waste."

And when the Dragon saw them start, he turned and flew after them, with
his great wings flapping like clouds at sunset, and the Hippogriff's
wide wings were snowy as clouds at moonrise.

When the people in the town saw the Dragon fly off after the Hippogriff
and the King they all came out of their houses to look, and when they
saw the two disappear they made up their minds to the worst, and began
to think what they would wear for Court mourning.

But the Dragon could not catch the Hippogriff. The red wings were bigger
than the white ones, but they were not so strong, and so the
white-winged horse flew away and away and away, with the Dragon
pursuing, till he reached the very middle of the Pebbly Waste.

Now, the Pebbly Waste is just like the parts of the seaside where there
is no sand--all round, loose, shifting stones, and there is no grass
there and no tree within a hundred miles of it.

Lionel jumped off the white horse's back in the very middle of the
Pebbly Waste, and he hurriedly unclasped _The Book of Beasts_ and laid
it open on the pebbles. Then he clattered among the pebbles in his haste
to get back on to his white horse, and had just jumped on when up came
the Dragon. He was flying very feebly, and looking around everywhere for
a tree, for it was just on the stroke of twelve, the sun was shining
like a gold guinea in the blue sky, and there was not a tree for a
hundred miles.

The white-winged horse flew around and around the Dragon as he writhed
on the dry pebbles. He was getting very hot: indeed, parts of him even
had begun to smoke. He knew that he must certainly catch fire in
another minute unless he could get under a tree. He made a snatch with
his red claws at the King and Hippogriff, but he was too feeble to reach
them, and besides, he did not dare to overexert himself for fear he
should get any hotter.

It was then that he saw _The Book of Beasts_ lying on the pebbles, open
at the page with "Dragon" written at the bottom. He looked and he
hesitated, and he looked again, and then, with one last squirm of rage,
the Dragon wriggled himself back into the picture and sat down under the
palm tree, and the page was a little singed as he went in.

As soon as Lionel saw that the Dragon had really been obliged to go and
sit under his own palm tree because it was the only tree there, he
jumped off his horse and shut the book with a bang.

"Oh, hurrah!" he cried. "Now we really have done it."

And he clasped the book very tightly with the turquoise and ruby clasps.

"Oh, my precious Hippogriff," he cried. "You are the bravest, dearest,
most beautiful--"

"Hush," whispered the Hippogriff modestly. "Don't you see that we are
not alone?"

And indeed there was quite a crowd round them on the Pebbly Waste: the
Prime Minister and the Parliament and the Soccer Players and the
Orphanage and the Manticora and the Rocking Horse, and indeed everyone
who had been eaten by the Dragon. You see, it was impossible for the
Dragon to take them into the book with him--it was a tight fit even for
one Dragon--so, of course, he had to leave them outside.

       *       *       *       *       *

They all got home somehow, and all lived happy ever after.

When the King asked the Manticora where he would like to live he begged
to be allowed to go back into the book. "I do not care for public life,"
he said.

Of course he knew his way onto his own page, so there was no danger of
his opening the book at the wrong page and letting out a Dragon or
anything. So he got back into his picture and has never come out since:
That is why you will never see a Manticora as long as you live, except
in a picture-book. And of course he left the kitties outside, because
there was no room for them in the book--and the milk cans too.

Then the Rocking Horse begged to be allowed to go and live on the
Hippogriff's page of the book. "I should like," he said, "to live
somewhere where Dragons can't get at me."

So the beautiful, white-winged Hippogriff showed him the way in, and
there he stayed till the King had him taken out for his
great-great-great-great-grandchildren to play with.

As for the Hippogriff, he accepted the position of the King's Own
Rocking Horse--a situation left vacant by the retirement of the wooden
one. And the Blue Bird and the Butterfly sing and flutter among the
lilies and roses of the Palace garden to this very day.

[Illustration: UNCLE JAMES OR THE PURPLE STRANGER]




II. Uncle James, or The Purple Stranger


The Princess and the gardener's boy were playing in the backyard.

"What will you do when you grow up, Princess?" asked the gardener's boy.

"I should like to marry you, Tom," said the Princess. "Would you mind?"

"No," said the gardener's boy. "I shouldn't mind much. I'll marry you if
you like--if I have time."

For the gardener's boy meant, as soon as he was grown up, to be a
general and a poet and a Prime Minister and an admiral and a civil
engineer. Meanwhile, he was top of all his classes at school, and
tip-top of the geography class.

As for the Princess Mary Ann, she was a very good little girl, and
everyone loved her. She was always kind and polite, even to her Uncle
James and to other people whom she did not like very much; and though
she was not very clever, for a Princess, she always tried to do her
lessons. Even if you know perfectly well that you can't do your lessons,
you may as well try, and sometimes you find that by some fortunate
accident they really _are_ done. Then the Princess had a truly good
heart: She was always kind to her pets. She never slapped her
hippopotamus when it broke her dolls in its playful gambols, and she
never forgot to feed her rhinoceroses in their little hutch in the
backyard. Her elephant was devoted to her, and sometimes Mary Ann made
her nurse quite cross by smuggling the dear little thing up to bed with
her and letting it go to sleep with its long trunk laid lovingly across
her throat, and its pretty head cuddled under the Royal right ear.

When the Princess had been good all through the week--for, like all
real, live, nice children, she was sometimes naughty, but never
bad--Nurse would allow her to ask her little friends to come on
Wednesday morning early and spend the day, because Wednesday is the end
of the week in that country. Then, in the afternoon, when all the little
dukes and duchesses and marquises and countesses had finished their rice
pudding and had had their hands and faces washed after it, Nurse would
say: "Now, my dears, what would you like to do this afternoon?" just as
if she didn't know. And the answer would be always the same:

"Oh, do let's go to the Zoological Gardens and ride on the big guinea
pig and feed the rabbits and hear the dormouse asleep."

So their pinafores were taken off and they all went to the Zoological
Gardens, where twenty of them could ride at a time on the guinea pig,
and where even the little ones could feed the great rabbits if some
grown-up person were kind enough to lift them up for the purpose.

There always was some such person, because in Rotundia everybody was
kind--except one.

Now that you have read as far as this you know, of course, that the
Kingdom of Rotundia was a very remarkable place; and if you are a
thoughtful child--as of course you are--you will not need me to tell you
what was the most remarkable thing about it. But in case you are not a
thoughtful child--and it is just possible of course that you are not--I
will tell you at once what that most remarkable thing was. _All the
animals were the wrong sizes!_ And this was how it happened.

In old, old, olden times, when all our world was just loose earth and
air and fire and water mixed up anyhow like a pudding, and spinning
around like mad trying to get the different things to settle into their
proper places, a round piece of earth got loose and went spinning away
by itself across the water, which was just beginning to try to get
spread out smooth into a real sea. And as the great round piece of earth
flew away, going around and around as hard as it could, it met a long
piece of hard rock that had got loose from another part of the puddingy
mixture, and the rock was so hard, and was going so fast, that it ran
its point through the round piece of earth and stuck out on the other
side of it, so that the two together were like a very-very-much-too-big
spinning top.

I am afraid all this is very dull, but you know geography is never quite
lively, and after all, I must give you a little information even in a
fairy tale--like the powder in jam.

Well, when the pointed rock smashed into the round bit of earth the
shock was so great that it set them spinning together through the
air--which was just getting into its proper place, like all the rest of
the things--only, as luck would have it, they forgot which way around
they had been going, and began to spin around the wrong way. Presently
Center of Gravity--a great giant who was managing the whole
business--woke up in the middle of the earth and began to grumble.

"Hurry up," he said. "Come down and lie still, can't you?"

So the rock with the round piece of earth fell into the sea, and the
point of the rock went into a hole that just fitted it in the stony sea
bottom, and there it spun around the wrong way seven times and then lay
still. And that round piece of land became, after millions of years, the
Kingdom of Rotundia.

This is the end of the geography lesson. And now for just a little
natural history, so that we may not feel that we are quite wasting our
time. Of course, the consequence of the island having spun around the
wrong way was that when the animals began to grow on the island they all
grew the wrong sizes. The guinea pig, as you know, was as big as our
elephants, and the elephant--dear little pet--was the size of the silly,
tiny, black-and-tan dogs that ladies carry sometimes in their muffs. The
rabbits were about the size of our rhinoceroses, and all about the wild
parts of the island they had made their burrows as big as railway
tunnels. The dormouse, of course, was the biggest of all the creatures.
I can't tell you how big he was. Even if you think of elephants it will
not help you at all. Luckily there was only one of him, and he was
always asleep. Otherwise I don't think the Rotundians could have borne
with him. As it was, they made him a house, and it saved the expense of
a brass band, because no band could possibly have been heard when the
dormouse was talking in his sleep.

The men and women and children in this wonderful island were quite the
right size, because their ancestors had come over with the Conqueror
long after the island had settled down and the animals grown on it.

Now the natural history lesson is over, and if you have been attending,
you know more about Rotundia than anyone there did, except three people:
the Lord Chief Schoolmaster, the Princess's uncle--who was a magician,
and knew everything without learning it--and Tom, the gardener's son.

Tom had learned more at school than anyone else, because he wished to
take a prize. The prize offered by the Lord Chief Schoolmaster was a
_History of Rotundia_, beautifully bound, with the Royal arms on the
back. But after that day when the Princess said she meant to marry Tom,
the gardener's boy thought it over, and he decided that the best prize
in the world would be the Princess, and this was the prize Tom meant to
take; and when you are a gardener's son and have decided to marry a
Princess, you will find that the more you learn at school the better.

The Princess always played with Tom on the days when the little dukes
and marquises did not come to tea--and when he told her he was almost
sure of the first prize, she clapped her hands and said: "Dear Tom, dear
good, clever Tom, you deserve all the prizes. And I will give you my pet
elephant--and you can keep him till we're married."

The pet elephant was called Fido, and the gardener's son took him away
in his coat pocket. He was the dearest little elephant you ever
saw--about six inches long. But he was very, very wise--he could not
have been wiser if he had been a mile high. He lay down comfortably in
Tom's pocket, and when Tom put in his hand, Fido curled his little trunk
around Tom's fingers with an affectionate confidence that made the boy's
heart warm to his new little pet. What with the elephant, and the
Princess's affection, and the knowledge that the very next day he would
receive the _History of Rotundia_, beautifully bound, with the Royal
arms on the cover, Tom could hardly sleep a wink. And, besides, the dog
did bark so terribly. There was only one dog in Rotundia--the kingdom
could not afford to keep more than one: He was a Mexican lapdog of the
kind that in most parts of the world only measures seven inches from the
end of his dear nose to the tip of his darling tail--but in Rotundia he
was bigger than I can possibly expect you to believe. And when he
barked, his bark was so large that it filled up all the night and left
no room for sleep or dreams or polite conversation, or anything else at
all. He never barked at things that went on in the island--he was too
large-minded for that; but when ships went blundering by in the dark,
tumbling over the rocks at the end of the island, he would bark once or
twice, just to let the ships know that they couldn't come playing about
there just as they liked.

But on this particular night he barked and barked and barked--and the
Princess said, "Oh dear, oh dear, I wish he wouldn't, I am so sleepy."
And Tom said to himself, "I wonder whatever is the matter. As soon as
it's light I'll go and see."

So when it began to be pretty pink-and-yellow daylight, Tom got up and
went out. And all the time the Mexican lapdog barked so that the houses
shook, and the tiles on the roof of the palace rattled like milk cans in
a cart whose horse is frisky.

"I'll go to the pillar," thought Tom, as he went through the town. The
pillar, of course, was the top of the piece of rock that had stuck
itself through Rotundia millions of years before, and made it spin
around the wrong way. It was quite in the middle of the island, and
stuck up ever so far, and when you were at the top you could see a great
deal farther than when you were not.

As Tom went out from the town and across the downs, he thought what a
pretty sight it was to see the rabbits in the bright, dewy morning,
frisking with their young ones by the mouths of their burrows. He did
not go very near the rabbits, of course, because when a rabbit of that
size is at play it does not always look where it is going, and it might
easily have crushed Tom with its foot, and then it would have been very
sorry afterward. And Tom was a kind boy, and would not have liked to
make even a rabbit unhappy. Earwigs in our country often get out of the
way when they think you are going to walk on them. They too have kind
hearts, and they would not like you to be sorry afterward.

So Tom went on, looking at the rabbits and watching the morning grow
more and more red and golden. And the Mexican lapdog barked all the
time, till the church bells tinkled, and the chimney of the apple
factory rocked again.

But when Tom got to the pillar, he saw that he would not need to climb
to the top to find out what the dog was barking at.

For there, by the pillar, lay a very large purple dragon. His wings were
like old purple umbrellas that have been very much rained on, and his
head was large and bald, like the top of a purple toadstool, and his
tail, which was purple too, was very, very, very long and thin and
tight, like the lash of a carriage whip.

It was licking one of its purple umbrella-y wings, and every now and
then it moaned and leaned its head back against the rocky pillar as
though it felt faint. Tom saw at once what had happened. A flight of
purple dragons must have crossed the island in the night, and this poor
one must have knocked its wing and broken it against the pillar.

Everyone is kind to everyone in Rotundia, and Tom was not afraid of the
dragon, although he had never spoken to one before. He had often watched
them flying across the sea, but he had never expected to get to know one
personally.

So now he said: "I am afraid you don't feel quite well."

The dragon shook his large purple head. He could not speak, but like all
other animals, he could understand well enough when he liked.

"Can I get you anything?" asked Tom, politely.

The dragon opened his purple eyes with an inquiring smile.

"A bun or two, now," said Tom, coaxingly. "There's a beautiful bun tree
quite close."

The dragon opened a great purple mouth and licked his purple lips, so
Tom ran and shook the bun tree, and soon came back with an armful of
fresh currant buns, and as he came he picked a few of the Bath kind,
which grow on the low bushes near the pillar.

Because, of course, another consequence of the island's having spun the
wrong way is that all the things we have to make--buns and cakes and
shortbread--grow on trees and bushes, but in Rotundia they have to make
their cauliflowers and cabbages and carrots and apples and onions, just
as our cooks make puddings and turnovers.

Tom gave all the buns to the dragon, saying: "Here, try to eat a little.
You'll soon feel better then."

The dragon ate up the buns, nodded rather ungraciously, and began to
lick his wing again. So Tom left him and went back to the town with the
news, and everyone was so excited at a real live dragon's being on the
island--a thing that had never happened before--that they all went out
to look at it, instead of going to the prize-giving, and the Lord Chief
Schoolmaster went with the rest. Now, he had Tom's prize, the _History
of Rotundia_, in his pocket--the one bound in calf, with the Royal arms
on the cover--and it happened to drop out, and the dragon ate it, so Tom
never got the prize after all. But the dragon, when he had gotten it,
did not like it.

"Perhaps it's all for the best," said Tom. "I might not have liked that
prize either, if I had gotten it."

It happened to be a Wednesday, so when the Princess's friends were asked
what they would like to do, all the little dukes and marquises and earls
said, "Let's go and see the dragon." But the little duchesses and
marchionesses and countesses said they were afraid.

Then Princess Mary Ann spoke up royally, and said, "Don't be silly,
because it's only in fairy stories and histories of England and things
like that, that people are unkind and want to hurt each other. In
Rotundia everyone is kind, and no one has anything to be afraid of,
unless they're naughty; and then we know it's for our own good. Let's
all go and see the dragon. We might take him some acid drops." So they
went. And all the titled children took it in turns to feed the dragon
with acid drops, and he seemed pleased and flattered, and wagged as much
of his purple tail as he could get at conveniently; for it was a very,
very long tail indeed. But when it came to the Princess's turn to give
an acid drop to the dragon, he smiled a very wide smile, and wagged his
tail to the very last long inch of it, as much as to say, "Oh, you nice,
kind, pretty little Princess." But deep down in his wicked purple heart
he was saying, "Oh, you nice, fat, pretty little Princess, I should like
to eat you instead of these silly acid drops." But of course nobody
heard him except the Princess's uncle, and he was a magician, and
accustomed to listening at doors. It was part of his trade.

Now, you will remember that I told you there was one wicked person in
Rotundia, and I cannot conceal from you any longer that this Complete
Bad was the Princess's Uncle James. Magicians are always bad, as you
know from your fairy books, and some uncles are bad, as you see by the
_Babes in the Wood_, or the _Norfolk Tragedy_, and one James at least
was bad, as you have learned from your English history. And when anyone
is a magician, and is also an uncle, and is named James as well, you
need not expect anything nice from him. He is a Threefold Complete
Bad--and he will come to no good.

Uncle James had long wanted to get rid of the Princess and have the
kingdom to himself. He did not like many things--a nice kingdom was
almost the only thing he cared for--but he had never seen his way quite
clearly, because everyone is so kind in Rotundia that wicked spells will
not work there, but run off those blameless islanders like water off a
duck's back. Now, however, Uncle James thought there might be a chance
for him--because he knew that now there were two wicked people on the
island who could stand by each other--himself and the dragon. He said
nothing, but he exchanged a meaningful glance with the dragon, and
everyone went home to tea. And no one had seen the meaningful glance
except Tom.

Tom went home, and told his elephant all about it. The intelligent
little creature listened carefully, and then climbed from Tom's knee to
the table, on which stood an ornamental calendar that the Princess had
given Tom for a Christmas present. With its tiny trunk the elephant
pointed out a date--the fifteenth of August, the Princess's birthday,
and looked anxiously at its master.

"What is it, Fido--good little elephant--then?" said Tom, and the
sagacious animal repeated its former gesture. Then Tom understood.

"Oh, something is to happen on her birthday? All right. I'll be on the
lookout." And he was.

[Illustration: "By-and-by he began to wander." _See page 29._]

At first the people of Rotundia were quite pleased with the dragon, who
lived by the pillar and fed himself from the bun trees, but by-and-by he
began to wander. He would creep into the burrows made by the great
rabbits; and excursionists, sporting on the downs, would see his long,
tight, whiplike tail wriggling down a burrow and out of sight, and
before they had time to say, "There he goes," his ugly purple head
would come poking out from another rabbit-hole--perhaps just behind
them--or laugh softly to itself just in their ears. And the dragon's
laugh was not a merry one. This sort of hide-and-seek amused people at
first, but by-and-by it began to get on their nerves: and if you don't
know what that means, ask Mother to tell you next time you are playing
blind man's buff when she has a headache. Then the dragon got into the
habit of cracking his tail, as people crack whips, and this also got on
people's nerves. Then, too, little things began to be missed. And you
know how unpleasant that is, even in a private school, and in a public
kingdom it is, of course, much worse. The things that were missed were
nothing much at first--a few little elephants, a hippopotamus or two,
and some giraffes, and things like that. It was nothing much, as I say,
but it made people feel uncomfortable. Then one day a favorite rabbit of
the Princess's, called Frederick, mysteriously disappeared, and then
came a terrible morning when the Mexican lapdog was missing. He had
barked ever since the dragon came to the island, and people had grown
quite used to the noise. So when his barking suddenly ceased it woke
everybody up--and they all went out to see what was the matter. And the
lapdog was gone!

A boy was sent to wake the army, so that it might look for him. But the
army was gone too! And now the people began to be frightened. Then Uncle
James came out onto the terrace of the palace, and he made the people a
speech. He said: "Friends--fellow citizens--I cannot disguise from
myself or from you that this purple dragon is a poor penniless exile, a
helpless alien in our midst, and, besides, he is a--is no end of a
dragon."

The people thought of the dragon's tail and said, "Hear, hear."

Uncle James went on: "Something has happened to a gentle and defenseless
member of our community. We don't know what has happened."

Everyone thought of the rabbit named Frederick, and groaned.

"The defenses of our country have been swallowed up," said Uncle James.

Everyone thought of the poor army.

"There is only one thing to be done." Uncle James was warming to his
subject. "Could we ever forgive ourselves if by neglecting a simple
precaution we lost more rabbits--or even, perhaps, our navy, our police,
and our fire brigade? For I warn you that the purple dragon will respect
nothing, however sacred."

Everyone thought of themselves--and they said, "What is the simple
precaution?"

Then Uncle James said: "Tomorrow is the dragon's birthday. He is
accustomed to have a present on his birthday. If he gets a nice present
he will be in a hurry to take it away and show it to his friends, and he
will fly off and never come back."

The crowd cheered wildly--and the Princess from her balcony clapped her
hands.

"The present the dragon expects," said Uncle James, cheerfully, "is
rather an expensive one. But, when we give, it should not be in a
grudging spirit, especially to visitors. What the dragon wants is a
Princess. We have only one Princess, it is true; but far be it from us
to display a miserly temper at such a moment. And the gift is worthless
that costs the giver nothing. Your readiness to give up your Princess
will only show how generous you are."

The crowd began to cry, for they loved their Princess, though they quite
saw that their first duty was to be generous and give the poor dragon
what it wanted.

The Princess began to cry, for she did not want to be anybody's birthday
present--especially a purple dragon's. And Tom began to cry because he
was so angry.

He went straight home and told his little elephant; and the elephant
cheered him up so much that presently the two grew quite absorbed in a
top that the elephant was spinning with his little trunk.

Early in the morning Tom went to the palace. He looked out across the
downs--there were hardly any rabbits playing there now--and then he
gathered white roses and threw them at the Princess's window till she
woke up and looked out.

"Come up and kiss me," she said.

So Tom climbed up the white rosebush and kissed the Princess through the
window, and said: "Many happy returns of the day."

Then Mary Ann began to cry, and said: "Oh, Tom--how can you? When you
know quite well--"

"Oh, don't," said Tom. "Why, Mary Ann, my precious, my Princess--what do
you think I should be doing while the dragon was getting his birthday
present? Don't cry, my own little Mary Ann! Fido and I have arranged
everything. You've only got to do as you are told."

"Is that all?" said the Princess. "Oh--that's easy--I've often done
that!"

Then Tom told her what she was to do. And she kissed him again and
again. "Oh, you dear, good, clever Tom," she said. "How glad I am that I
gave you Fido. You two have saved me. You dears!"

The next morning Uncle James put on his best coat and hat and the vest
with the gold snakes on it--he was a magician, and he had a bright taste
in vests--and he called with a cab to take the Princess out.

"Come, little birthday present," he said tenderly. "The dragon will be
so pleased. And I'm glad to see you're not crying. You know, my child,
we cannot begin too young to learn to think of the happiness of others
rather than our own. I should not like my dear little niece to be
selfish, or to wish to deny a trivial pleasure to a poor, sick dragon,
far from his home and friends."

The Princess said she would try not to be selfish.

Presently the cab drew up near the pillar, and there was the dragon, his
ugly purple head shining in the sun, and his ugly purple mouth half
open.

Uncle James said: "Good morning, sir. We have brought you a small
present for your birthday. We do not like to let such an anniversary go
by without some suitable testimonial, especially to one who is a
stranger in our midst. Our means are small, but our hearts are large. We
have but one Princess, but we give her freely--do we not, my child?"

The Princess said she supposed so, and the dragon came a little nearer.

Suddenly a voice cried: "Run!" and there was Tom, and he had brought the
Zoological guinea pig and a pair of Belgian hares with him. "Just to see
fair," said Tom.

Uncle James was furious. "What do you mean, sir," he cried, "by
intruding on a State function with your common rabbits and things? Go
away, naughty little boy, and play with them somewhere else."

But while he was speaking the rabbits had come up one on each side of
him, their great sides towering ever so high, and now they pressed him
between them so that he was buried in their thick fur and almost choked.
The Princess, meantime, had run to the other side of the pillar and was
peeping around it to see what was going on. A crowd had followed the cab
out of the town; now they reached the scene of the "State Function"--and
they all cried out: "Fair play--play fair! We can't go back on our word
like this. Give a thing and take a thing? Why, it's never done. Let the
poor exiled stranger dragon have his birthday present." And they tried
to get at Tom--but the guinea pig stood in the way.

"Yes," Tom cried. "Fair play is a jewel. And your helpless exile shall
have the Princess--if he can catch her. Now then, Mary Ann."

Mary Ann looked around the big pillar and called to the dragon: "Bo! you
can't catch me," and began to run as fast as ever she could, and the
dragon ran after her. When the Princess had run a half mile she stopped,
dodged around a tree, and ran back to the pillar and around it, and the
dragon after her. You see, he was so long he could not turn as quickly
as she could. Around and around the pillar ran the Princess. The first
time she ran around a long way from the pillar, and then nearer and
nearer--with the dragon after her all the time; and he was so busy
trying to catch her that he never noticed that Tom had tied the very end
of his long, tight, whipcordy tail to the rock, so that the more the
dragon ran around, the more times he twisted his tail around the pillar.
It was exactly like winding a top--only the peg was the pillar, and the
dragon's tail was the string. And the magician was safe between the
Belgian hares, and couldn't see anything but darkness, or do anything
but choke.

When the dragon was wound onto the pillar as much as he possibly could
be, and as tight--like cotton on a reel--the Princess stopped running,
and though she had very little breath left, she managed to say,
"Yah--who's won now?"

This annoyed the dragon so much that he put out all his strength--spread
his great purple wings, and tried to fly at her. Of course this pulled
his tail, and pulled it very hard, so hard that as he pulled the tail
_had_ to come, and the pillar _had_ to come around with the tail, and
the island _had_ to come around with the pillar, and in another minute
the tail was loose, and the island was spinning around exactly like a
top. It spun so fast that everyone fell flat on their faces and held on
tight to themselves, because they felt something was going to happen.
All but the magician, who was choking between the Belgian hares, and
felt nothing but fur and fury.

And something did happen. The dragon had sent the kingdom of Rotundia
spinning the way it ought to have gone at the beginning of the world,
and as it spun around, all the animals began to change sizes. The guinea
pigs got small, and the elephants got big, and the men and women and
children would have changed sizes too, if they had not had the sense to
hold on to themselves, very tight indeed, with both hands; which, of
course, the animals could not be expected to know how to do. And the
best of it was that when the small beasts got big and the big beasts got
small the dragon got small too, and fell at the Princess's feet--a
little, crawling, purple newt with wings.

[Illustration: "The dragon ran after her." _See page 34._]

"Funny little thing," said the Princess, when she saw it. "I will take
it for a birthday present."

But while all the people were still on their faces, holding on tight to
themselves, Uncle James, the magician, never thought of holding
tight--he only thought of how to punish Belgian hares and the sons of
gardeners; so when the big beasts grew small, he grew small with the
other beasts, and the little purple dragon, when he fell at the
Princess's feet, saw there a very small magician named Uncle James. And
the dragon took him because it wanted a birthday present.

So now all the animals were new sizes--and at first it seemed very
strange to everyone to have great lumbering elephants and a tiny little
dormouse, but they have gotten used to it now, and think no more of it
than we do.

All this happened several years ago, and the other day I saw in the
_Rotundia Times_ an account of the wedding of the Princess with Lord
Thomas Gardener, K.C.D., and I knew she could not have married anyone
but Tom, so I suppose they made him a Lord on purpose for the
wedding--and _K.C.D._, of course, means Clever Conqueror of the Dragon.
If you think that is wrong it is only because you don't know how they
spell in Rotundia. The paper said that among the beautiful presents of
the bridegroom to the bride was an enormous elephant, on which the
bridal pair made their wedding tour. This must have been Fido. You
remember Tom promised to give him back to the Princess when they were
married. The _Rotundia Times_ called the married couple "the happy
pair." It was clever of the paper to think of calling them that--it is
such a pretty and novel expression, and I think it is truer than many of
the things you see in papers.

Because, you see, the Princess and the gardener's son were so fond of
each other they could not help being happy--and besides, they had an
elephant of their very own to ride on. If that is not enough to make
people happy, I should like to know what is. Though, of course, I know
there are some people who could not be happy unless they had a whale to
sail on, and perhaps not even then. But they are greedy, grasping
people, the kind who would take four helps of pudding, as likely as not,
which neither Tom nor Mary Ann ever did.

[Illustration: THE DELIVERERS OF THEIR COUNTRY]




III. The Deliverers of Their Country


It all began with Effie's getting something in her eye. It hurt very
much indeed, and it felt something like a red-hot spark--only it seemed
to have legs as well, and wings like a fly. Effie rubbed and cried--not
real crying, but the kind your eye does all by itself without your being
miserable inside your mind--and then she went to her father to have the
thing in her eye taken out. Effie's father was a doctor, so of course he
knew how to take things out of eyes--he did it very cleverly with a soft
paintbrush dipped in castor oil.

When he had gotten the thing out, he said: "This is very curious." Effie
had often got things in her eye before, and her father had always seemed
to think it was natural--rather tiresome and naughty perhaps, but still
natural. He had never before thought it curious.

Effie stood holding her handkerchief to her eye, and said: "I don't
believe it's out." People always say this when they have had something
in their eyes.

"Oh, yes--it's out," said the doctor. "Here it is, on the brush. This is
very interesting."

Effie had never heard her father say that about anything that she had
any share in. She said: "What?"

The doctor carried the brush very carefully across the room, and held
the point of it under his microscope--then he twisted the brass screws
of the microscope, and looked through the top with one eye.

"Dear me," he said. "Dear, dear me! Four well-developed limbs; a long
caudal appendage; five toes, unequal in lengths, almost like one of the
_Lacertidae_, yet there are traces of wings." The creature under his eye
wriggled a little in the castor oil, and he went on: "Yes; a batlike
wing. A new specimen, undoubtedly. Effie, run round to the professor and
ask him to be kind enough to step in for a few minutes."

"You might give me sixpence, Daddy," said Effie, "because I did bring
you the new specimen. I took great care of it inside my eye, and my eye
_does_ hurt."

The doctor was so pleased with the new specimen that he gave Effie a
shilling, and presently the professor stepped round. He stayed to lunch,
and he and the doctor quarreled very happily all the afternoon about the
name and the family of the thing that had come out of Effie's eye.

But at teatime another thing happened. Effie's brother Harry fished
something out of his tea, which he thought at first was an earwig. He
was just getting ready to drop it on the floor, and end its life in the
usual way, when it shook itself in the spoon--spread two wet wings, and
flopped onto the tablecloth. There it sat, stroking itself with its feet
and stretching its wings, and Harry said: "Why, it's a tiny newt!"

The professor leaned forward before the doctor could say a word. "I'll
give you half a crown for it, Harry, my lad," he said, speaking very
fast; and then he picked it up carefully on his handkerchief.

"It is a new specimen," he said, "and finer than yours, Doctor."

It was a tiny lizard, about half an inch long--with scales and wings.

So now the doctor and the professor each had a specimen, and they were
both very pleased. But before long these specimens began to seem less
valuable. For the next morning, when the knife-boy was cleaning the
doctor's boots, he suddenly dropped the brushes and the boot and the
blacking, and screamed out that he was burnt.

And from inside the boot came crawling a lizard as big as a kitten, with
large, shiny wings.

"Why," said Effie, "I know what it is. It is a dragon like the one St.
George killed."

And Effie was right. That afternoon Towser was bitten in the garden by a
dragon about the size of a rabbit, which he had tried to chase, and the
next morning all the papers were full of the wonderful "winged lizards"
that were appearing all over the country. The papers would not call them
dragons, because, of course, no one believes in dragons nowadays--and at
any rate the papers were not going to be so silly as to believe in fairy
stories. At first there were only a few, but in a week or two the
country was simply running alive with dragons of all sizes, and in the
air you could sometimes see them as thick as a swarm of bees. They all
looked alike except as to size. They were green with scales, and they
had four legs and a long tail and great wings like bats' wings, only the
wings were a pale, half-transparent yellow, like the gear-boxes on
bicycles.

They breathed fire and smoke, as all proper dragons must, but still the
newspapers went on pretending they were lizards, until the editor of the
_Standard_ was picked up and carried away by a very large one, and then
the other newspaper people had not anyone left to tell them what they
ought not to believe. So when the largest elephant in the Zoo was
carried off by a dragon, the papers gave up pretending--and put ALARMING
PLAGUE OF DRAGONS at the top of the paper.

[Illustration: "The largest elephant in the zoo was carried off." _See
page 43._]

You have no idea how alarming it was, and at the same time how
aggravating. The large-size dragons were terrible certainly, but when
once you had found out that the dragons always went to bed early because
they were afraid of the chill night air, you had only to stay indoors
all day, and you were pretty safe from the big ones. But the smaller
sizes were a perfect nuisance. The ones as big as earwigs got in the
soap, and they got in the butter. The ones as big as dogs got in the
bath, and the fire and smoke inside them made them steam like anything
when the cold water tap was turned on, so that careless people were
often scalded quite severely. The ones that were as large as pigeons
would get into workbaskets or corner drawers and bite you when you were
in a hurry to get a needle or a handkerchief. The ones as big as sheep
were easier to avoid, because you could see them coming; but when they
flew in at the windows and curled up under your eiderdown, and you did
not find them till you went to bed, it was always a shock. The ones this
size did not eat people, only lettuce, but they always scorched the
sheets and pillowcases dreadfully.

Of course, the County Council and the police did everything that could
be done: It was no use offering the hand of the Princess to anyone who
killed a dragon. This way was all very well in olden times--when there
was only one dragon and one Princess; but now there were far more
dragons than Princesses--although the Royal Family was a large one. And
besides, it would have been a mere waste of Princesses to offer rewards
for killing dragons, because everybody killed as many dragons as they
could quite out of their own heads and without rewards at all, just to
get the nasty things out of the way. The County Council undertook to
cremate all dragons delivered at their offices between the hours of ten
and two, and whole wagonloads and cartloads and truckloads of dead
dragons could be seen any day of the week standing in a long line in the
street where the County Council had their offices. Boys brought
barrowloads of dead dragons, and children on their way home from morning
school would call in to leave the handful or two of little dragons they
had brought in their satchels, or carried in their knotted pocket
handkerchiefs. And yet there seemed to be as many dragons as ever. Then
the police stuck up great wood and canvas towers covered with patent
glue. When the dragons flew against these towers, they stuck fast, as
flies and wasps do on the sticky papers in the kitchen; and when the
towers were covered all over with dragons, the police inspector used to
set fire to the towers, and burnt them and dragons and all.

And yet there seemed to be more dragons than ever. The shops were full
of patent dragon poison and anti-dragon soap, and dragonproof curtains
for the windows; and indeed, everything that could be done was done.

And yet there seemed to be more dragons than ever.

It was not very easy to know what would poison a dragon, because, you
see, they ate such different things. The largest kind ate elephants as
long as there were any, and then went on with horses and cows. Another
size ate nothing but lilies of the valley, and a third size ate only
Prime Ministers if they were to be had, and, if not, would feed freely
on servants in livery. Another size lived on bricks, and three of them
ate two thirds of the South Lambeth Infirmary in one afternoon.

But the size Effie was most afraid of was about as big as your dining
room, and that size ate little girls and boys.

At first Effie and her brother were quite pleased with the change in
their lives. It was so amusing to sit up all night instead of going to
sleep, and to play in the garden lighted by electric lamps. And it
sounded so funny to hear Mother say, when they were going to bed: "Good
night, my darlings, sleep sound all day, and don't get up too soon. You
must not get up before it's quite dark. You wouldn't like the nasty
dragons to catch you."

But after a time they got very tired of it all: They wanted to see the
flowers and trees growing in the fields, and to see the pretty sunshine
out of doors, and not just through glass windows and patent dragonproof
curtains. And they wanted to play on the grass, which they were not
allowed to do in the electric lamp-lighted garden because of the
night-dew.

And they wanted so much to get out, just for once, in the beautiful,
bright, dangerous daylight, that they began to try and think of some
reason why they ought to go out. Only they did not like to disobey their
mother.

But one morning their mother was busy preparing some new dragon poison
to lay down in the cellars, and their father was bandaging the hand of
the boot boy, which had been scratched by one of the dragons who liked
to eat Prime Ministers when they were to be had, so nobody remembered to
say to the children: "Don't get up till it is quite dark!"

"Go now," said Harry. "It would not be disobedient to go. And I know
exactly what we ought to do, but I don't know how we ought to do it."

"What ought we to do?" said Effie.

"We ought to wake St. George, of course," said Harry. "He was the only
person in his town who knew how to manage dragons; the people in the
fairy tales don't count. But St. George is a real person, and he is only
asleep, and he is waiting to be waked up. Only nobody believes in St.
George now. I heard father say so."

"We do," said Effie.

"Of course we do. And don't you see, Ef, that's the very reason why we
could wake him? You can't wake people if you don't believe in them, can
you?"

Effie said no, but where could they find St. George?

"We must go and look," said Harry boldly. "You shall wear a dragonproof
frock, made of stuff like the curtains. And I will smear myself all over
with the best dragon poison, and--"

Effie clasped her hands and skipped with joy and cried: "Oh, Harry! I
know where we can find St. George! In St. George's Church, of course."

"Um," said Harry, wishing he had thought of it for himself, "you have a
little sense sometimes, for a girl."

So the next afternoon, quite early, long before the beams of sunset
announced the coming night, when everybody would be up and working, the
two children got out of bed. Effie wrapped herself in a shawl of
dragonproof muslin--there was no time to make the frock--and Harry made
a horrid mess of himself with the patent dragon poison. It was warranted
harmless to infants and invalids, so he felt quite safe.

Then they joined hands and set out to walk to St. George's Church. As
you know, there are many St. George's churches, but fortunately they
took the turning that leads to the right one, and went along in the
bright sunlight, feeling very brave and adventurous.

There was no one about in the streets except dragons, and the place was
simply swarming with them. Fortunately none of the dragons were just the
right size for eating little boys and girls, or perhaps this story might
have had to end here. There were dragons on the pavement, and dragons on
the roadway, dragons basking on the front doorsteps of public buildings,
and dragons preening their wings on the roofs in the hot afternoon sun.
The town was quite green with them. Even when the children had gotten
out of the town and were walking in the lanes, they noticed that the
fields on each side were greener than usual with the scaly legs and
tails; and some of the smaller sizes had made themselves asbestos nests
in the flowering hawthorn hedges.

Effie held her brother's hand very tight, and once when a fat dragon
flopped against her ear she screamed out, and a whole flight of green
dragons rose from the field at the sound, and sprawled away across the
sky. The children could hear the rattle of their wings as they flew.

"Oh, I want to go home," said Effie.

"Don't be silly," said Harry. "Surely you haven't forgotten about the
Seven Champions and all the princes. People who are going to be their
country's deliverers never scream and say they want to go home."

"And are we," asked Effie--"deliverers, I mean?"

"You'll see," said her brother, and on they went.

When they came to St. George's Church they found the door open, and they
walked right in--but St. George was not there, so they walked around the
churchyard outside, and presently they found the great stone tomb of St.
George, with the figure of him carved in marble outside, in his armor
and helmet, and with his hands folded on his breast.

"How ever can we wake him?" they said. Then Harry spoke to St.
George--but he would not answer; and he called, but St. George did not
seem to hear; and then he actually tried to waken the great
dragon-slayer by shaking his marble shoulders. But St. George took no
notice.

Then Effie began to cry, and she put her arms around St. George's neck
as well as she could for the marble, which was very much in the way at
the back, and she kissed the marble face, and she said: "Oh, dear, good,
kind St. George, please wake up and help us."

And at that St. George opened his eyes sleepily, and stretched himself
and said: "What's the matter, little girl?"

So the children told him all about it; he turned over in his marble and
leaned on one elbow to listen. But when he heard that there were so many
dragons he shook his head.

"It's no good," he said, "they would be one too many for poor old
George. You should have waked me before. I was always for a fair
fight--one man one dragon, was my motto."

Just then a flight of dragons passed overhead, and St. George half drew
his sword.

But he shook his head again and pushed the sword back as the flight of
dragons grew small in the distance.

"I can't do anything," he said. "Things have changed since my time. St.
Andrew told me about it. They woke him up over the engineers' strike,
and he came to talk to me. He says everything is done by machinery now;
there must be some way of settling these dragons. By the way, what sort
of weather have you been having lately?"

This seemed so careless and unkind that Harry would not answer, but
Effie said patiently, "It has been very fine. Father says it is the
hottest weather there has ever been in this country."

"Ah, I guessed as much," said the Champion, thoughtfully. "Well, the
only thing would be ... dragons can't stand wet and cold, that's the
only thing. If you could find the taps."

St. George was beginning to settle down again on his stone slab.

"Good night, very sorry I can't help you," he said, yawning behind his
marble hand.

"Oh, but you can," cried Effie. "Tell us--what taps?"

"Oh, like in the bathroom," said St. George, still more sleepily. "And
there's a looking glass, too; shows you all the world and what's going
on. St. Denis told me about it; said it was a very pretty thing. I'm
sorry I can't--good night."

And he fell back into his marble and was fast asleep again in a moment.

"We shall never find the taps," said Harry. "I say, wouldn't it be awful
if St. George woke up when there was a dragon near, the size that eats
champions?"

Effie pulled off her dragonproof veil. "We didn't meet any the size of
the dining room as we came along," she said. "I daresay we shall be
quite safe."

So she covered St. George with the veil, and Harry rubbed off as much as
he could of the dragon poison onto St. George's armor, so as to make
everything quite safe for him.

"We might hide in the church till it is dark," he said, "and then--"

But at that moment a dark shadow fell on them, and they saw that it was
a dragon exactly the size of the dining room at home.

So then they knew that all was lost. The dragon swooped down and caught
the two children in his claws; he caught Effie by her green silk sash,
and Harry by the little point at the back of his Eton jacket--and then,
spreading his great yellow wings, he rose into the air, rattling like a
third-class carriage when the brake is hard on.

"Oh, Harry," said Effie, "I wonder when he will eat us!" The dragon was
flying across woods and fields with great flaps of his wings that
carried him a quarter of a mile at each flap.

[Illustration: "He rose into the air, rattling like a third-class
carriage." _See page 50._]

Harry and Effie could see the country below, hedges and rivers and
churches and farmhouses flowing away from under them, much faster than
you see them running away from the sides of the fastest express train.

And still the dragon flew on. The children saw other dragons in the air
as they went, but the dragon who was as big as the dining room never
stopped to speak to any of them, but just flew on quite steadily.

"He knows where he wants to go," said Harry. "Oh, if he would only drop
us before he gets there!"

But the dragon held on tight, and he flew and flew and flew until at
last, when the children were quite giddy, he settled down, with a
rattling of all his scales, on the top of a mountain. And he lay there
on his great green scaly side, panting, and very much out of breath,
because he had come such a long way. But his claws were fast in Effie's
sash and the little point at the back of Harry's Eton jacket.

Then Effie took out the knife Harry had given her on her birthday. It
had cost only sixpence to begin with, and she had had it a month, and it
never could sharpen anything but slate-pencils; but somehow she managed
to make that knife cut her sash in front, and crept out of it, leaving
the dragon with only a green silk bow in one of his claws. That knife
would never have cut Harry's jacket-tail off, though, and when Effie had
tried for some time she saw that this was so and gave it up. But with
her help Harry managed to wriggle quietly out of his sleeves, so that
the dragon had only an Eton jacket in his other claw. Then the children
crept on tiptoe to a crack in the rocks and got in. It was much too
narrow for the dragon to get in also, so they stayed in there and waited
to make faces at the dragon when he felt rested enough to sit up and
begin to think about eating them. He was very angry, indeed, when they
made faces at him, and blew out fire and smoke at them, but they ran
farther into the cave so that he could not reach them, and when he was
tired of blowing he went away.

But they were afraid to come out of the cave, so they went farther in,
and presently the cave opened out and grew bigger, and the floor was
soft sand, and when they had come to the very end of the cave there was
a door, and on it was written: UNIVERSAL TAPROOM. PRIVATE. NO ONE
ALLOWED INSIDE.

So they opened the door at once just to peep in, and then they
remembered what St. George had said.

"We can't be worse off than we are," said Harry, "with a dragon waiting
for us outside. Let's go in."

They went boldly into the taproom, and shut the door behind them.

And now they were in a sort of room cut out of the solid rock, and all
along one side of the room were taps, and all the taps were labeled with
china labels like you see in baths. And as they could both read words of
two syllables or even three sometimes, they understood at once that they
had gotten to the place where the weather is turned on from. There were
six big taps labeled "Sunshine," "Wind," "Rain," "Snow," "Hail," "Ice,"
and a lot of little ones, labeled "Fair to moderate," "Showery," "South
breeze," "Nice growing weather for the crops," "Skating," "Good open
weather," "South wind," "East wind," and so on. And the big tap labeled
"Sunshine" was turned full on. They could not see any sunshine--the cave
was lighted by a skylight of blue glass--so they supposed the sunlight
was pouring out by some other way, as it does with the tap that washes
out the underneath parts of patent sinks in kitchens.

Then they saw that one side of the room was just a big looking glass,
and when you looked in it you could see everything that was going on in
the world--and all at once, too, which is not like most looking glasses.
They saw the carts delivering the dead dragons at the County Council
offices, and they saw St. George asleep under the dragonproof veil. And
they saw their mother at home crying because her children had gone out
in the dreadful, dangerous daylight, and she was afraid a dragon had
eaten them. And they saw the whole of England, like a great puzzle
map--green in the field parts and brown in the towns, and black in the
places where they make coal and crockery and cutlery and chemicals. All
over it, on the black parts, and on the brown, and on the green, there
was a network of green dragons. And they could see that it was still
broad daylight, and no dragons had gone to bed yet.

Effie said, "Dragons do not like cold." And she tried to turn off the
sunshine, but the tap was out of order, and that was why there had been
so much hot weather, and why the dragons had been able to be hatched. So
they left the sunshine tap alone, and they turned on the snow and left
the tap full on while they went to look in the glass. There they saw the
dragons running all sorts of ways like ants if you are cruel enough to
pour water into an ant-heap, which, of course, you never are. And the
snow fell more and more.

Then Effie turned the rain tap quite full on, and presently the dragons
began to wriggle less, and by-and-by some of them lay quite still, so
the children knew the water had put out the fires inside them, and they
were dead. So then they turned on the hail--only half on, for fear of
breaking people's windows--and after a while there were no more dragons
to be seen moving.

Then the children knew that they were indeed the deliverers of their
country.

"They will put up a monument to us," said Harry, "as high as Nelson's!
All the dragons are dead."

"I hope the one that was waiting outside for us is dead!" said Effie.
"And about the monument, Harry, I'm not so sure. What can they do with
such a lot of dead dragons? It would take years and years to bury them,
and they could never be burnt now they are so soaking wet. I wish the
rain would wash them off into the sea."

But this did not happen, and the children began to feel that they had
not been so frightfully clever after all.

"I wonder what this old thing's for," said Harry. He had found a rusty
old tap, which seemed as though it had not been used for ages. Its china
label was quite coated over with dirt and cobwebs. When Effie had
cleaned it with a bit of her skirt--for curiously enough both the
children had come out without pocket handkerchiefs--she found that the
label said "Waste."

"Let's turn it on," she said. "It might carry off the dragons."

The tap was very stiff from not having been used for such a long time,
but together they managed to turn it on, and then ran to the mirror to
see what happened.

Already a great, round black hole had opened in the very middle of the
map of England, and the sides of the map were tilting themselves up, so
that the rain ran down toward the hole.

"Oh, hurrah, hurrah, hurrah!" cried Effie, and she hurried back to the
taps and turned on everything that seemed wet. "Showery," "Good open
weather," "Nice growing weather for the crops," and even "South" and
"South-West," because she had heard her father say that those winds
brought rain.

And now the floods of rain were pouring down on the country, and great
sheets of water flowed toward the center of the map, and cataracts of
water poured into the great round hole in the middle of the map, and the
dragons were being washed away and disappearing down the waste pipe in
great green masses and scattered green shoals--single dragons and
dragons by the dozen; of all sizes, from the ones that carry off
elephants down to the ones that get in your tea.

Presently there was not a dragon left. So then they turned off the tap
named "Waste," and they half-turned off the one labeled "Sunshine"--it
was broken, so that they could not turn it off altogether--and they
turned on "Fair to moderate" and "Showery" and both taps stuck, so that
they could not be turned off, which accounts for our climate.

       *       *       *       *       *

How did they get home again? By the Snowdon railway of course.

And was the nation grateful? Well--the nation was very wet. And by the
time the nation had gotten dry again it was interested in the new
invention for toasting muffins by electricity, and all the dragons were
almost forgotten. Dragons do not seem so important when they are dead
and gone, and, you know, there never was a reward offered.

And what did Father and Mother say when Effie and Harry got home?

My dear, that is the sort of silly question you children always will
ask. However, just for this once I don't mind telling you.

Mother said: "Oh, my darlings, my darlings, you're safe--you're safe!
You naughty children--how could you be so disobedient? Go to bed at
once!"

And their father the doctor said: "I wish I had known what you were
going to do! I should have liked to preserve a specimen. I threw away
the one I got out of Effie's eye. I intended to get a more perfect
specimen. I did not anticipate this immediate extinction of the
species."

The professor said nothing, but he rubbed his hands. He had kept his
specimen--the one the size of an earwig that he gave Harry half a crown
for--and he has it to this day.

You must get him to show it to you!




[Illustration: THE ICE DRAGON]




IV. The Ice Dragon, or Do as You Are Told


This is the tale of the wonders that befell on the evening of the
eleventh of December, when they did what they were told not to do. You
may think that you know all the unpleasant things that could possibly
happen to you if you are disobedient, but there are some things which
even you do not know, and they did not know them either.

Their names were George and Jane.

There were no fireworks that year on Guy Fawkes' Day, because the heir
to the throne was not well. He was cutting his first tooth, and that is
a very anxious time for any person--even for a Royal one. He was really
very poorly, so that fireworks would have been in the worst possible
taste, even at Land's End or in the Isle of Man, whilst in Forest Hill,
which was the home of Jane and George, anything of the kind was quite
out of the question. Even the Crystal Palace, empty-headed as it is,
felt that this was no time for Catherine-wheels.

But when the Prince had cut his tooth, rejoicings were not only
admissible but correct, and the eleventh of December was proclaimed
firework day. All the people were most anxious to show their loyalty,
and to enjoy themselves at the same time. So there were fireworks and
torchlight processions, and set pieces at the Crystal Palace, with
"Blessings on our Prince" and "Long Live our Royal Darling" in
different-colored fires; and the most private of boarding schools had a
half holiday; and even the children of plumbers and authors had tuppence
each given them to spend as they liked.

George and Jane had sixpence each--and they spent the whole amount on a
golden rain, which would not light for ever so long, and when it did
light went out almost at once, so they had to look at the fireworks in
the gardens next door, and at the ones at the Crystal Palace, which were
very glorious indeed.

All their relations had colds in their heads, so Jane and George were
allowed to go out into the garden alone to let off their firework. Jane
had put on her fur cape and her thick gloves, and her hood with the
silver fox fur on it that was made out of Mother's old muff; and George
had his overcoat with the three capes, and his comforter, and Father's
sealskin traveling cap with the pieces that come down over your ears.

It was dark in the garden, but the fireworks all about made it seem very
gay, and though the children were cold they were quite sure that they
were enjoying themselves.

They got up on the fence at the end of the garden to see better; and
then they saw, very far away, where the edge of the dark world is, a
shining line of straight, beautiful lights arranged in a row, as if they
were the spears carried by a fairy army.

"Oh, how pretty," said Jane. "I wonder what they are. It looks as if the
fairies were planting little shining baby poplar trees and watering them
with liquid light."

"Liquid fiddlestick!" said George. He had been to school, so he knew
that these were only the Aurora Borealis, or Northern Lights. And he
said so.

"But what is the Rory Bory what's-its-name?" asked Jane. "Who lights it,
and what's it there for?"

George had to own that he had not learned that.

"But I know," said he, "that it has something to do with the Great Bear,
and the Dipper, and the Plough, and Charles's Wain."

"And what are they?" asked Jane.

"Oh, they're the surnames of some of the star families. There goes a
jolly rocket," answered George, and Jane felt as if she almost
understood about the star families.

The fairy spears of light twinkled and gleamed: They were much prettier
than the big, blaring, blazing bonfire that was smoking and flaming and
spluttering in the next-door-but-one garden--prettier even than the
colored fires at the Crystal Palace.

"I wish we could see them nearer," Jane said. "I wonder if the star
families are nice families--the kind that Mother would like us to go to
tea with, if we were little stars?"

"They aren't that sort of families at all, Silly," said her brother,
kindly trying to explain. "I only said 'families' because a kid like you
wouldn't have understood if I'd said constel ... and, besides, I've
forgotten the end of the word. Anyway, the stars are all up in the sky,
so you can't go to tea with them."

"No," said Jane. "I said if we were little stars."

"But we aren't," said George.

"No," said Jane, with a sigh. "I know that. I'm not so stupid as you
think, George. But the Tory Bories are somewhere at the edge. Couldn't
we go and see them?"

"Considering you're eight, you haven't much sense." George kicked his
boots against the fencing to warm his toes. "It's half the world away."

"It looks very near," said Jane, hunching up her shoulders to keep her
neck warm.

"They're close to the North Pole," said George. "Look here--I don't care
a straw about the Aurora Borealis, but I shouldn't mind discovering the
North Pole: It's awfully difficult and dangerous, and then you come home
and write a book about it with a lot of pictures, and everybody says how
brave you are."

Jane got off the fence.

"Oh, George, _let's_," she said. "We shall never have such a chance
again--all alone by ourselves--and quite late, too."

"I'd go right enough if it wasn't for you," George answered gloomily,
"but you know they always say I lead you into mischief--and if we went
to the North Pole we should get our boots wet, as likely as not, and
you remember what they said about not going on the grass."

"They said the _lawn_," said Jane. "We're not going on the _lawn_. Oh,
George, do, do let's. It doesn't look so _very_ far--we could be back
before they had time to get dreadfully angry."

"All right," said George, "but mind, I don't want to go."

So off they went. They got over the fence, which was very cold and white
and shiny because it was beginning to freeze, and on the other side of
the fence was somebody else's garden, so they got out of that as quickly
as they could, and beyond that was a field where there was another big
bonfire, with people standing around it who looked quite dark-skinned.

"It's like Indians," said George, and wanted to stop and look, but Jane
pulled him on, and they passed by the bonfire and got through a gap in
the hedge into another field--a dark one; and far away, beyond quite a
number of other dark fields, the Northern Lights shone and sparkled and
twinkled.

Now, during the winter the Arctic regions come much farther south than
they are marked on the map. Very few people know this, though you would
think they could tell it by the ice in the jugs of a morning. And just
when George and Jane were starting for the North Pole, the Arctic
regions had come down very nearly as far as Forest Hill, so that, as the
children walked on, it grew colder and colder, and presently they saw
that the fields were covered with snow, and there were great icicles
hanging from all the hedges and gates. And the Northern Lights still
seemed some way off.

They were crossing a very rough, snowy field when Jane first noticed the
animals. There were white rabbits and white hares and all sorts and
sizes of white birds, and some larger creatures in the shadows of the
hedges that Jane was sure were wolves and bears.

"Polar bears and Arctic wolves, of course I mean," she said, for she did
not want George to think her stupid again.

There was a great hedge at the end of this field, all covered with snow
and icicles; but the children found a place where there was a hole, and
as no bears or wolves seemed to be just in that part of the hedge, they
crept through and scrambled out of the frozen ditch on the other side.
And then they stood still and held their breath with wonder.

For in front of them, running straight and smooth right away to the
Northern Lights, lay a great wide road of pure dark ice, and on each
side were tall trees all sparkling with white frost, and from the boughs
of the trees hung strings of stars threaded on fine moonbeams, and
shining so brightly that it was like a beautiful fairy daylight. Jane
said so; but George said it was like the electric lights at the Earl's
Court Exhibition.

The rows of trees went as straight as ruled lines away--away and
away--and at the other end of them shone the Aurora Borealis.

There was a signpost of silvery snow, and on it in letters of pure ice
the children read: THIS WAY TO THE NORTH POLE.

Then George said: "Way or no way, I know a slide when I see one--so here
goes." And he took a run on the frozen snow, and Jane took a run when
she saw him do it, and the next moment they were sliding away, each with
feet half a yard apart, along the great slide that leads to the North
Pole.

This great slide is made for the convenience of the Polar bears, who,
during the winter months, get their food from the Army and Navy
Stores--and it is the most perfect slide in the world. If you have never
come across it, it is because you have never let off fireworks on the
eleventh of December, and have never been thoroughly naughty and
disobedient. But do not be these things in the hope of finding the great
slide--because you might find something quite different, and then you
will be sorry.

The great slide is like common slides in that when once you have started
you have to go on to the end--unless you fall down--and then it hurts
just as much as the smaller kind on ponds. The great slide runs
downhill all the way, so that you keep on going faster and faster and
faster. George and Jane went so fast that they had not time to notice
the scenery. They only saw the long lines of frosted trees and the
starry lamps, and on each side, rushing back as they slid on, a very
broad, white world and a very large, black night; and overhead as well
as in the trees the stars were bright like silver lamps, and far ahead
shone and trembled and sparkled the line of fairy spears. Jane said
that, and George said: "I can see the Northern Lights quite plain."

It is very pleasant to slide and slide and slide on clear, dark
ice--especially if you feel you are really going somewhere, and more
especially if that somewhere is the North Pole. The children's feet made
no noise on the ice, and they went on and on in a beautiful white
silence. But suddenly the silence was shattered and a cry rang out over
the snow.

"Hey! You there! Stop!"

"Tumble for your life!" cried George, and he fell down at once, because
it is the only way to stop. Jane fell on top of him--and then they
crawled on hands and knees to the snow at the edge of the slide--and
there was a sportsman, dressed in a peaked cap and a frozen moustache,
like the one you see in the pictures about Ice-Peter, and he had a gun
in his hand.

"You don't happen to have any bullets about you?" said he.

"No," George said, truthfully. "I had five of father's revolver
cartridges, but they were taken away the day Nurse turned out my pockets
to see if I had taken the knob of the bathroom door by mistake."

"Quite so," said the sportsman, "these accidents will occur. You don't
carry firearms, then, I presume?"

"I haven't any fire_arms_," said George, "but I have a fire_work_. It's
only a squib one of the boys gave me, if that's any good." And he began
to feel among the string and peppermints, and buttons and tops and nibs
and chalk and foreign postage stamps in his knickerbocker pockets.

"One could but try," the sportsman replied, and he held out his hand.

But Jane pulled at her brother's jacket-tail and whispered, "Ask him
what he wants it for."

So then the sportsman had to confess that he wanted the firework to kill
the white grouse with; and, when they came to look, there was the white
grouse himself, sitting in the snow, looking quite pale and careworn,
and waiting anxiously for the matter to be decided one way or the other.

George put all the things back in his pockets, and said, "No, I shan't.
The reason for shooting him stopped yesterday--I heard Father say so--so
it wouldn't be fair, anyhow. I'm very sorry; but I can't--so there!"

The sportsman said nothing, only he shook his fist at Jane, and then he
got on the slide and tried to go toward the Crystal Palace--which was
not easy, because that way is uphill. So they left him trying, and went
on.

Before they started, the white grouse thanked them in a few pleasant,
well-chosen words, and then they took a sideways slanting run and
started off again on the great slide, and so away toward the North Pole
and the twinkling, beautiful lights.

The great slide went on and on, and the lights did not seem to come much
nearer, and the white silence wrapped around them as they slid along the
wide, icy path. Then once again the silence was broken to bits by
someone calling: "Hey! You there! Stop!"

"Tumble for your life!" cried George, and tumbled as before, stopping in
the only possible way, and Jane stopped on top of him, and they crawled
to the edge and came suddenly on a butterfly collector, who was looking
for specimens with a pair of blue glasses and a blue net and a blue book
with colored plates.

"Excuse me," said the collector, "but have you such a thing as a needle
about you--a very long needle?"

"I have a needle _book_," replied Jane, politely, "but there aren't any
needles in it now. George took them all to do the things with pieces of
cork--in the 'Boy's Own Scientific Experimenter' and 'The Young
Mechanic.' He did not do the things, but he did for the needles."

"Curiously enough," said the collector, "I too wish to use the needle in
connection with cork."

"I have a hatpin in my hood," said Jane. "I fastened the fur with it
when it caught in the nail on the greenhouse door. It is very long and
sharp--would that do?"

"One could but try," said the collector, and Jane began to feel for the
pin. But George pinched her arm and whispered, "Ask what he wants it
for." Then the collector had to own that he wanted the pin to stick
through the great Arctic moth, "a magnificent specimen," he added,
"which I am most anxious to preserve."

And there, sure enough, in the collector's butterfly net sat the great
Arctic moth, listening attentively to the conversation.

"Oh, I couldn't!" cried Jane. And while George was explaining to the
collector that they would really rather not, Jane opened the blue folds
of the butterfly net, and asked the moth quietly if it would please step
outside for a moment. And it did.

When the collector saw that the moth was free, he seemed less angry than
grieved.

"Well, well," said he, "here's a whole Arctic expedition thrown away! I
shall have to go home and fit out another. And that means a lot of
writing to the papers and things. You seem to be a singularly
thoughtless little girl."

So they went on, leaving him too, trying to go uphill towards the
Crystal Palace.

When the great white Arctic moth had returned thanks in a suitable
speech, George and Jane took a sideways slanting run and started sliding
again, between the star-lamps along the great slide toward the North
Pole. They went faster and faster, and the lights ahead grew brighter
and brighter--so that they could not keep their eyes open, but had to
blink and wink as they went--and then suddenly the great slide ended in
an immense heap of snow, and George and Jane shot right into it because
they could not stop themselves, and the snow was soft, so that they went
in up to their very ears.

When they had picked themselves out and thumped each other on the back
to get rid of the snow, they shaded their eyes and looked, and there,
right in front of them, was the wonder of wonders--the North
Pole--towering high and white and glistening, like an ice-lighthouse,
and it was quite, quite close, so that you had to put your head as far
back as it would go, and farther, before you could see the high top of
it. It was made entirely of ice. You will hear grown-up people talk a
great deal of nonsense about the North Pole, and when you are grown up,
it is even possible that you may talk nonsense about it yourself (the
most unlikely things do happen) but deep down in your heart you must
always remember that the North Pole is made of clear ice, and could not
possibly, if you come to think of it, be made of anything else.

All around the Pole, making a bright ring about it, were hundreds of
little fires, and the flames of them did not flicker and twist, but went
up blue and green and rosy and straight like the stalks of dream lilies.

Jane said so, but George said they were as straight as ramrods.

And these flames were the Aurora Borealis, which the children had seen
as far away as Forest Hill.

The ground was quite flat, and covered with smooth, hard snow, which
shone and sparkled like the top of a birthday cake that has been iced at
home. The ones done at the shops do not shine and sparkle, because they
mix flour with the icing sugar.

"It is like a dream," said Jane.

And George said, "It _is_ the North Pole. Just think of the fuss people
always make about getting here--and it was no trouble at all, really."

"I daresay lots of people have gotten here," said Jane, dismally. "It's
not the getting _here_--I see that--it's the getting back again.
Perhaps no one will ever know that _we_ have been here, and the robins
will cover us with leaves and--"

"Nonsense," said George. "There aren't any robins, and there aren't any
leaves. It's just the North Pole, that's all, and I've found it; and now
I shall try to climb up and plant the British flag on the top--my
handkerchief will do; and if it really _is_ the North Pole, my pocket
compass Uncle James gave me will spin around and around, and then I
shall know. Come on."

So Jane came on; and when they got close to the clear, tall, beautiful
flames they saw that there was a great, queer-shaped lump of ice all
around the bottom of the Pole--clear, smooth, shining ice, that was
deep, beautiful Prussian blue, like icebergs, in the thick parts, and
all sorts of wonderful, glimmery, shimmery, changing colors in the thin
parts, like the cut-glass chandelier in Grandmamma's house in London.

"It is a very curious shape," said Jane. "It's almost like"--she moved
back a step to get a better view of it--"it's almost like a dragon."

"It's much more like the lampposts on the Thames Embankment," said
George, who had noticed a curly thing like a tail that went twisting up
the North Pole.

"Oh, George," cried Jane, "it _is_ a dragon; I can see its wings.
Whatever shall we do?"

And, sure enough, it _was_ a dragon--a great, shining, winged, scaly,
clawy, big-mouthed dragon--made of pure ice. It must have gone to sleep
curled around the hole where the warm steam used to come up from the
middle of the earth, and then when the earth got colder, and the column
of steam froze and was turned into the North Pole, the dragon must have
got frozen in his sleep--frozen too hard to move--and there he stayed.
And though he was very terrible he was very beautiful too.

Jane said so, but George said, "Oh, don't bother; I'm thinking how to
get onto the Pole and try the compass without waking the brute."

[Illustration: "Sure enough, it was a dragon." _See page 68._]

The dragon certainly was beautiful, with his deep, clear Prussian
blueness, and his rainbow-colored glitter. And rising from within the
cold coil of the frozen dragon the North Pole shot up like a pillar made
of one great diamond, and every now and then it cracked a little, from
sheer cold. The sound of the cracking was the only thing that broke the
great white silence in the midst of which the dragon lay like an
enormous jewel, and the straight flames went up all around him like the
stalks of tall lilies.

And as the children stood there looking at the most wonderful sight
their eyes had ever seen, there was a soft padding of feet and a
hurry-scurry behind them, and from the outside darkness beyond the
flame-stalks came a crowd of little brown creatures running, jumping,
scrambling, tumbling head over heels and on all fours, and some even
walking on their heads. They joined hands as they came near the fires
and danced around in a ring.

"It's bears," said Jane. "I know it is. Oh, how I wish we hadn't come;
and my boots are so wet."

The dancing-ring broke up suddenly, and the next moment hundreds of
furry arms clutched at George and Jane, and they found themselves in the
middle of a great, soft, heaving crowd of little fat people in brown fur
dresses, and the white silence was quite gone.

"Bears, indeed," cried a shrill voice. "You'll wish we were bears before
you've done with us."

This sounded so dreadful that Jane began to cry. Up to now the children
had only seen the most beautiful and wondrous things, but now they began
to be sorry they had done what they were told not to, and the difference
between "lawn" and "grass" did not seem so great as it had at Forest
Hill.

Directly Jane began to cry, all the brown people started back. No one
cries in the Arctic regions for fear of being struck by the frost. So
that these people had never seen anyone cry before.

"Don't cry for real," whispered George, "or you'll get chilblains in
your eyes. But pretend to howl--it frightens them."

So Jane went on pretending to howl, and the real crying stopped: It
always does when you begin to pretend. You try it.

Then, speaking very loud so as to be heard over the howls of Jane,
George said: "Yah--who's afraid? We are George and Jane--who are you?"

"We are the sealskin dwarfs," said the brown people, twisting their
furry bodies in and out of the crowd like the changing glass in
kaleidoscopes. "We are very precious and expensive, for we are made,
throughout, of the very best sealskin."

"And what are those fires for?" bellowed George--for Jane was crying
louder and louder.

"Those," shouted the dwarfs, coming a step nearer, "are the fires we
make to thaw the dragon. He is frozen now--so he sleeps curled up around
the Pole--but when we have thawed him with our fires he will wake up and
go and eat everybody in the world except us."

"WHATEVER--DO--YOU--WANT--HIM--TO--DO--THAT--FOR?" yelled George.

"Oh--just for spite," bawled the dwarfs carelessly--as if they were
saying, "Just for fun."

Jane stopped crying to say: "You are heartless."

"No, we aren't," they said. "Our hearts are made of the finest sealskin,
just like little fat sealskin purses--"

And they all came a step nearer. They were very fat and round. Their
bodies were like sealskin jackets on a very stout person; their heads
were like sealskin muffs; their legs were like sealskin boas; and their
hands and feet were like sealskin tobacco pouches. And their faces were
like seals' faces, inasmuch as they, too, were covered with sealskin.

"Thank you so much for telling us," said George. "Good evening. (Keep on
howling, Jane!)"

But the dwarfs came a step nearer, muttering and whispering. Then the
muttering stopped--and there was a silence so deep that Jane was afraid
to howl in it. But it was a brown silence, and she had liked the white
silence better.

Then the chief dwarf came quite close and said: "What's that on your
head?"

And George felt it was all up--for he knew it was his father's sealskin
cap.

The dwarf did not wait for an answer. "It's made of one of us," he
screamed, "or else one of the seals, our poor relations. Boy, now your
fate is sealed!"

Looking at the wicked seal-faces all around them, George and Jane felt
that their fate was sealed indeed.

The dwarfs seized the children in their furry arms. George kicked, but
it is no use kicking sealskin, and Jane howled, but the dwarfs were
getting used to that. They climbed up the dragon's side and dumped the
children down on his icy spine, with their backs against the North Pole.
You have no idea how cold it was--the kind of cold that makes you feel
small and prickly inside your clothes, and makes you wish you had twenty
times as many clothes to feel small and prickly inside of.

The sealskin dwarfs tied George and Jane to the North Pole, and, as they
had no ropes, they bound them with snow-wreaths, which are very strong
when they are made in the proper way, and they heaped up the fires very
close and said: "Now the dragon will get warm, and when he gets warm he
will wake, and when he wakes he will be hungry, and when he is hungry he
will begin to eat, and the first thing he will eat will be you."

The little, sharp, many-colored flames sprang up like the stalks of
dream lilies, but no heat came to the children, and they grew colder and
colder.

"We shan't be very nice when the dragon does eat us, that's one
comfort," said George. "We shall be turned into ice long before that."

Suddenly there was a flapping of wings, and the white grouse perched on
the dragon's head and said: "Can I be of any assistance?"

[Illustration: "The dwarfs seized the children." _See page 72._]

Now, by this time the children were so cold, so cold, so very, very
cold, that they had forgotten everything but that, and they could say
nothing else. So the white grouse said: "One moment. I am only too
grateful for this opportunity of showing my sense of your manly conduct
about the firework!"

And the next moment there was a soft whispering rustle of wings
overhead, and then, fluttering slowly, softly down, came hundreds and
thousands of little white fluffy feathers. They fell on George and Jane
like snowflakes, and, like flakes of fallen snow lying one above
another, they grew into a thicker and thicker covering, so that
presently the children were buried under a heap of white feathers, and
only their faces peeped out.

"Oh, you dear, good, kind white grouse," said Jane, "but you'll be cold
yourself, won't you, now you have given us all your pretty dear
feathers?"

The white grouse laughed, and his laugh was echoed by thousands of kind,
soft bird voices.

"Did you think all those feathers came out of one breast? There are
hundreds and hundreds of us here, and every one of us can spare a little
tuft of soft breast feathers to help to keep two kind little hearts
warm!"

Thus spoke the grouse, who certainly had very pretty manners.

So now the children snuggled under the feathers and were warm, and when
the sealskin dwarfs tried to take the feathers away, the grouse and his
friends flew in their faces with flappings and screams, and drove the
dwarfs back. They are a cowardly folk.

The dragon had not moved yet--but then he might at any moment get warm
enough to move, and though George and Jane were now warm they were not
comfortable nor easy in their minds. They tried to explain to the
grouse; but though he is polite, he is not clever, and he only said:
"You've got a warm nest, and we'll see that no one takes it from you.
What more can you possibly want?"

Just then came a new, strange, jerky fluttering of wings far softer
than the grouse's, and George and Jane cried out together: "Oh, _do_
mind your wings in the fires!"

For they saw at once that it was the great white Arctic moth.

"What's the matter?" he asked, settling on the dragon's tail.

So they told him.

"Sealskin, are they?" said the moth. "Just you wait a minute!"

He flew off very crookedly, dodging the flames, and presently he came
back, and there were so many moths with him that it was as if a live
sheet of white wingedness were suddenly drawn between the children and
the stars.

And then the doom of the bad sealskin dwarfs fell suddenly on them.

For the great sheet of winged whiteness broke up and fell as snow falls,
and it fell upon the sealskin dwarfs; and every snowflake of it was a
live, fluttering, hungry moth that buried its greedy nose deep in the
sealskin fur.

Grown-up people will tell you that it is not moths but moths' children
who eat fur--but this is only when they are trying to deceive you. When
they are not thinking about you they say, "I fear the moths have got at
my ermine tippet," or, "Your poor Aunt Emma had a lovely sable cloak,
but it was eaten by moths." And now there were more moths than have ever
been together in this world before, all settling on the sealskin dwarfs.

The dwarfs did not see their danger till it was too late. Then they
called for camphor and bitter apple and oil of lavender and yellow soap
and borax; and some of the dwarfs even started to get these things, but
long before any of them could get to the chemist's, all was over. The
moths ate and ate and ate till the sealskin dwarfs, being sealskin
throughout, even to the empty hearts of them, were eaten down to the
very life--and they fell one by one on the snow and so came to their
end. And all around the North Pole the snow was brown with their flat
bare pelts.

"Oh, thank you--thank you, darling Arctic moth," cried Jane. "You are
good--I do hope you haven't eaten enough to disagree with you
afterward!"

Millions of moth voices answered, with laughter as soft as moth wings,
"We should be a poor set of fellows if we couldn't over eat ourselves
once in a while--to oblige a friend."

And off they all fluttered, and the white grouse flew off, and the
sealskin dwarfs were all dead, and the fires went out, and George and
Jane were left alone in the dark with the dragon!

"Oh, dear," said Jane, "this is the worst of all!"

"We've no friends left to help us," said George. He never thought that
the dragon himself might help them--but then that was an idea that would
never have occurred to any boy.

It grew colder and colder and colder, and even under the grouse feathers
the children shivered.

Then, when it was so cold that it could not manage to be any colder
without breaking the thermometer, it stopped. And then the dragon
uncurled himself from around the North Pole, and stretched his long, icy
length over the snow, and said: "This is something like! How faint those
fires did make me feel!"

The fact was, the sealskin dwarfs had gone the wrong way to work: The
dragon had been frozen so long that now he was nothing but solid ice all
through, and the fires only made him feel as if he were going to die.

But when the fires were out he felt quite well, and very hungry. He
looked around for something to eat. But he never noticed George and
Jane, because they were frozen to his back.

He moved slowly off, and the snow-wreaths that bound the children to the
Pole gave way with a snap, and there was the dragon, crawling
south--with Jane and George on his great, scaly, icy shining back. Of
course the dragon had to go south if he went anywhere, because when you
get to the North Pole there is no other way to go. The dragon rattled
and tinkled as he went, exactly like the cut-glass chandelier when you
touch it, as you are strictly forbidden to do. Of course there are a
million ways of going south from the North Pole--so you will own that it
was lucky for George and Jane when the dragon took the right way and
suddenly got his heavy feet on the great slide. Off he went, full speed,
between the starry lamps, toward Forest Hill and the Crystal Palace.

"He's going to take us home," said Jane. "Oh, he is a good dragon. I
_am_ glad!"

George was rather glad too, though neither of the children felt at all
sure of their welcome, especially as their feet were wet, and they were
bringing a strange dragon home with them.

They went very fast, because dragons can go uphill as easily as down.
You would not understand why if I told you--because you are only in long
division at present; yet if you want me to tell you, so that you can
show off to other children, I will. It is because dragons can get their
tails into the fourth dimension and hold on there, and when you can do
that everything else is easy.

The dragon went very fast, only stopping to eat the collector and the
sportsman, who were still struggling to go up the slide--vainly, because
they had no tails, and had never even heard of the fourth dimension.

When the dragon got to the end of the slide he crawled very slowly
across the dark field beyond the field where there was a bonfire, next
to the next-door garden at Forest Hill.

       *       *       *       *       *

He went slower and slower, and in the bonfire field he stopped
altogether, and because the Arctic regions had not got down so far as
that, and because the bonfire was very hot, the dragon began to melt and
melt and melt--and before the children knew what he was doing they found
themselves sitting in a large pool of water, and their boots were as wet
as wet, and there was not a bit of dragon left!

So they went indoors.

Of course some grown-up or other noticed at once that the boots of
George and Jane were wet and muddy, and that they had both been sitting
down in a very damp place, so they were sent to bed immediately.

It was long past their time, anyhow.

Now, if you are of an inquiring mind--not at all a nice thing in a
little child who reads fairy tales--you will want to know how it is that
since the sealskin dwarfs have all been killed, and the fires all been
let out, the Aurora Borealis shines, on cold nights, as brightly as
ever.

My dear, I do not know! I am not too proud to own that there are some
things I know nothing about--and this is one of them. But I do know that
whoever has lighted those fires again, it is certainly not the sealskin
dwarfs. They were all eaten by moths--and motheaten things are of no
use, even to light fires!




[Illustration: THE ISLAND OF THE NINE WHIRLPOOLS]




V. The Island of the Nine Whirlpools


The dark arch that led to the witch's cave was hung with a
black-and-yellow fringe of live snakes. As the Queen went in, keeping
carefully in the middle of the arch, all the snakes lifted their wicked,
flat heads and stared at her with their wicked, yellow eyes. You know it
is not good manners to stare, even at Royalty, except of course for
cats. And the snakes had been so badly brought up that they even put
their tongues out at the poor lady. Nasty, thin, sharp tongues they were
too.

Now, the Queen's husband was, of course, the King. And besides being a
King he was an enchanter, and considered to be quite at the top of his
profession, so he was very wise, and he knew that when Kings and Queens
want children, the Queen always goes to see a witch. So he gave the
Queen the witch's address, and the Queen called on her, though she was
very frightened and did not like it at all. The witch was sitting by a
fire of sticks, stirring something bubbly in a shiny copper cauldron.

"What do you want, my dear?" she said to the Queen.

"Oh, if you please," said the Queen, "I want a baby--a very nice one. We
don't want any expense spared. My husband said--"

"Oh, yes," said the witch. "I know all about him. And so you want a
child? Do you know it will bring you sorrow?"

"It will bring me joy first," said the Queen.

"Great sorrow," said the witch.

"Greater joy," said the Queen.

Then the witch said, "Well, have your own way. I suppose it's as much as
your place is worth to go back without it?"

"The King would be very much annoyed," said the poor Queen.

"Well, well," said the witch. "What will you give me for the child?"

"Anything you ask for, and all I have," said the Queen.

"Then give me your gold crown."

The Queen took it off quickly.

"And your necklace of blue sapphires."

The Queen unfastened it.

"And your pearl bracelets."

The Queen unclasped them.

"And your ruby clasps."

And the Queen undid the clasps.

"Now the lilies from your breast."

The Queen gathered together the lilies.

"And the diamonds of your little bright shoe buckles."

The Queen pulled off her shoes.

Then the witch stirred the stuff that was in the cauldron, and, one by
one, she threw in the gold crown and the sapphire necklace and the pearl
bracelets and the ruby clasps and the diamonds of the little bright shoe
buckles, and last of all she threw in the lilies.

The stuff in the cauldron boiled up in foaming flashes of yellow and
blue and red and white and silver, and sent out a sweet scent, and
presently the witch poured it out into a pot and set it to cool in the
doorway among the snakes.

Then she said to the Queen: "Your child will have hair as golden as your
crown, eyes as blue as your sapphires. The red of your rubies will lie
on its lips, and its skin will be clear and pale as your pearls. Its
soul will be white and sweet as your lilies, and your diamonds will be
no clearer than its wits."

"Oh, thank you, thank you," said the Queen, "and when will it come?"

"You will find it when you get home."

"And won't you have something for yourself?" asked the Queen. "Any
little thing you fancy--would you like a country, or a sack of jewels?"

"Nothing, thank you," said the witch. "I could make more diamonds in a
day than I should wear in a year."

"Well, but do let me do some little thing for you," the Queen went on.
"Aren't you tired of being a witch? Wouldn't you like to be a Duchess or
a Princess, or something like that?"

"There is one thing I should rather like," said the witch, "but it's
hard to get in my trade."

"Oh, tell me what," said the Queen.

"I should like some one to love me," said the witch.

Then the Queen threw her arms around the witch's neck and kissed her
half a hundred times. "Why," she said, "I love you better than my life!
You've given me the baby--and the baby shall love you too."

"Perhaps it will," said the witch, "and when the sorrow comes, send for
me. Each of your fifty kisses will be a spell to bring me to you. Now,
drink up your medicine, there's a dear, and run along home."

So the Queen drank the stuff in the pot, which was quite cool by this
time, and she went out under the fringe of snakes, and they all behaved
like good Sunday-school children. Some of them even tried to drop a
curtsy to her as she went by, though that is not easy when you are
hanging wrong way up by your tail. But the snakes knew the Queen was
friends with their mistress; so, of course, they had to do their best to
be civil.

When the Queen got home, sure enough there was the baby lying in the
cradle with the Royal arms blazoned on it, crying as naturally as
possible. It had pink ribbons to tie up its sleeves, so the Queen saw at
once it was a girl. When the King knew this he tore his black hair with
fury.

"Oh, you silly, silly Queen!" he said. "Why didn't I marry a clever
lady? Did you think I went to all the trouble and expense of sending you
to a witch to get a girl? You knew well enough it was a boy I wanted--a
boy, an heir, a Prince--to learn all my magic and my enchantments, and
to rule the kingdom after me. I'll bet a crown--my crown," he said, "you
never even thought to tell the witch what kind you wanted! Did you now?"

And the Queen hung her head and had to confess that she had only asked
for a child.

"Very well, madam," said the King, "very well--have your own way. And
make the most of your daughter, while she is a child."

The Queen did. All the years of her life had never held half so much
happiness as now lived in each of the moments when she held her little
baby in her arms. And the years went on, and the King grew more and more
clever at magic, and more and more disagreeable at home, and the
Princess grew more beautiful and more dear every day she lived.

The Queen and the Princess were feeding the goldfish in the courtyard
fountains with crumbs of the Princess's eighteenth birthday cake, when
the King came into the courtyard, looking as black as thunder, with his
black raven hopping after him. He shook his fist at his family, as
indeed he generally did whenever he met them, for he was not a King with
pretty home manners. The raven sat down on the edge of the marble basin
and tried to peck the goldfish. It was all he could do to show that he
was in the same temper as his master.

"A girl indeed!" said the King angrily. "I wonder you can dare to look
me in the face, when you remember how your silliness has spoiled
everything."

"You oughtn't to speak to my mother like that," said the Princess. She
was eighteen, and it came to her suddenly and all in a moment that she
was a grown-up, so she spoke out.

The King could not utter a word for several minutes. He was too angry.
But the Queen said, "My dear child, don't interfere," quite crossly, for
she was frightened.

And to her husband she said, "My dear, why do you go on worrying about
it? Our daughter is not a boy, it is true--but she may marry a clever
man who could rule your kingdom after you, and learn as much magic as
ever you cared to teach him."

Then the King found his tongue.

"If she does marry," he said, slowly, "her husband will have to be a
very clever man--oh, yes, very clever indeed! And he will have to know a
very great deal more magic than I shall ever care to teach him."

The Queen knew at once by the King's tone that he was going to be
disagreeable.

"Ah," she said, "don't punish the child because she loves her mother."

"I'm not going to punish her for that," said he. "I'm only going to
teach her to respect her father."

And without another word he went off to his laboratory and worked all
night, boiling different-colored things in crucibles, and copying charms
in curious twisted letters from old brown books with mold stains on
their yellowy pages.

The next day his plan was all arranged. He took the poor Princess to the
Lone Tower, which stands on an island in the sea, a thousand miles from
everywhere. He gave her a dowry, and settled a handsome income on her.
He engaged a competent dragon to look after her, and also a respectable
griffin whose birth and upbringing he knew all about. And he said: "Here
you shall stay, my dear, respectful daughter, till the clever man comes
to marry you. He'll have to be clever enough to sail a ship through the
Nine Whirlpools that spin around the island, and to kill the dragon and
the griffin. Till he comes you'll never get any older or any wiser. No
doubt he will soon come. You can employ yourself in embroidering your
wedding gown. I wish you joy, my dutiful child."

And his carriage, drawn by live thunderbolts (thunder travels very
fast), rose in the air and disappeared, and the poor Princess was left,
with the dragon and the griffin, on the Island of the Nine Whirlpools.

The Queen, left at home, cried for a day and a night, and then she
remembered the witch and called to her. And the witch came, and the
Queen told her all.

"For the sake of the twice twenty-five kisses you gave me," said the
witch, "I will help you. But it is the last thing I can do, and it is
not much. Your daughter is under a spell, and I can take you to her.
But, if I do, you will have to be turned to stone, and to stay so till
the spell is taken off the child."

"I would be a stone for a thousand years," said the poor Queen, "if at
the end of them I could see my dear again."

So the witch took the Queen in a carriage drawn by live sunbeams (which
travel more quickly than anything else in the world, and much quicker
than thunder), and so away and away to the Lone Tower on the Island of
the Nine Whirlpools. And there was the Princess sitting on the floor in
the best room of the Lone Tower, crying as if her heart would break, and
the dragon and the griffin were sitting primly on each side of her.

"Oh, Mother, Mother, Mother," she cried, and hung around the Queen's
neck as if she would never let go.

"Now," said the witch, when they had all cried as much as was good for
them, "I can do one or two other little things for you. Time shall not
make the Princess sad. All days will be like one day till her deliverer
comes. And you and I, dear Queen, will sit in stone at the gate of the
tower. In doing this for you I lose all my witch's powers, and when I
say the spell that changes you to stone, I shall change with you, and if
ever we come out of the stone, I shall be a witch no more, but only a
happy old woman."

Then the three kissed one another again and again, and the witch said
the spell, and on each side of the door there was now a stone lady. One
of them had a stone crown on its head and a stone scepter in its hand;
but the other held a stone tablet with words on it, which the griffin
and the dragon could not read, though they had both had a very good
education.

And now all days seemed like one day to the Princess, and the next day
always seemed the day when her mother would come out of the stone and
kiss her again. And the years went slowly by. The wicked King died, and
some one else took his kingdom, and many things were changed in the
world; but the island did not change, nor the Nine Whirlpools, nor the
griffin, nor the dragon, nor the two stone ladies. And all the time,
from the very first, the day of the Princess's deliverance was coming,
creeping nearer, and nearer, and nearer. But no one saw it coming except
the Princess, and she only in dreams. And the years went by in tens and
in hundreds, and still the Nine Whirlpools spun around, roaring in
triumph the story of many a good ship that had gone down in their swirl,
bearing with it some Prince who had tried to win the Princess and her
dowry. And the great sea knew all the other stories of the Princes who
had come from very far, and had seen the whirlpools, and had shaken
their wise young heads and said: "'Bout ship!" and gone discreetly home
to their nice, safe, comfortable kingdoms.

But no one told the story of the deliverer who was to come. And the
years went by.

Now, after more scores of years than you would like to add up on your
slate, a certain sailor-boy sailed on the high seas with his uncle, who
was a skilled skipper. And the boy could reef a sail and coil a rope and
keep the ship's nose steady before the wind. And he was as good a boy as
you would find in a month of Sundays, and worthy to be a Prince.

Now there is Something which is wiser than all the world--and it knows
when people are worthy to be Princes. And this Something came from the
farther side of the seventh world, and whispered in the boy's ear.

And the boy heard, though he did not know he heard, and he looked out
over the black sea with the white foam-horses galloping over it, and far
away he saw a light. And he said to the skipper, his uncle: "What light
is that?"

Then the skipper said: "All good things defend you, Nigel, from sailing
near that light. It is not mentioned in all charts; but it is marked
in the old chart I steer by, which was my father's father's before me,
and his father's father's before him. It is the light that shines from
the Lone Tower that stands above the Nine Whirlpools. And when my
father's father was young he heard from the very old man, his
great-great-grandfather, that in that tower an enchanted Princess,
fairer than the day, waits to be delivered. But there is no deliverance,
so never steer that way; and think no more of the Princess, for that is
only an idle tale. But the whirlpools are quite real."

So, of course, from that day Nigel thought of nothing else. And as he
sailed hither and thither upon the high seas he saw from time to time
the light that shone out to sea across the wild swirl of the Nine
Whirlpools. And one night, when the ship was at anchor and the skipper
asleep in his bunk, Nigel launched the ship's boat and steered alone
over the dark sea towards the light. He dared not go very near till
daylight should show him what, indeed, were the whirlpools he had to
dread.

But when the dawn came he saw the Lone Tower standing dark against the
pink and primrose of the East, and about its base the sullen swirl of
black water, and he heard the wonderful roar of it. So he hung off and
on, all that day and for six days besides. And when he had watched seven
days he knew something. For you are certain to know something if you
give for seven days your whole thought to it, even though it be only the
first declension, or the nine-times table, or the dates of the Norman
Kings.

What he knew was this: that for five minutes out of the 1,440 minutes
that make up a day the whirlpools slipped into silence, while the tide
went down and left the yellow sand bare. And every day this happened,
but every day it was five minutes earlier than it had been the day
before. He made sure of this by the ship's chronometer, which he had
thoughtfully brought with him.

[Illustration: "The Lone Tower on the Island of the Nine Whirlpools."
_See page 88._]

So on the eighth day, at five minutes before noon, Nigel got ready. And
when the whirlpools suddenly stopped whirling and the tide sank, like
water in a basin that has a hole in it, he stuck to his oars and put
his back into his stroke, and presently beached the boat on the yellow
sand. Then he dragged it into a cave, and sat down to wait.

By five minutes and one second past noon, the whirlpools were black and
busy again, and Nigel peeped out of his cave. And on the rocky ledge
overhanging the sea he saw a Princess as beautiful as the day, with
golden hair and a green gown--and he went out to meet her.

"I've come to save you," he said. "How darling and beautiful you are!"

"You are very good, and very clever, and very dear," said the Princess,
smiling and giving him both her hands.

He shut a little kiss in each hand before he let them go.

"So now, when the tide is low again, I will take you away in my boat,"
he said.

"But what about the dragon and the griffin?" asked the Princess.

"Dear me," said Nigel. "I didn't know about them. I suppose I can kill
them?"

"Don't be a silly boy," said the Princess, pretending to be very grown
up, for, though she had been on the island time only knows how many
years, she was just eighteen, and she still liked pretending. "You
haven't a sword, or a shield, or anything!"

"Well, don't the beasts ever go to sleep?"

"Why, yes," said the Princess, "but only once in twenty-four hours, and
then the dragon is turned to stone. But the griffin has dreams. The
griffin sleeps at teatime every day, but the dragon sleeps every day for
five minutes, and every day it is three minutes later than it was the
day before."

"What time does he sleep today?" asked Nigel.

"At eleven," said the Princess.

"Ah," said Nigel, "can you do sums?"

"No," said the Princess sadly. "I was never good at them."

"Then I must," said Nigel. "I can, but it's slow work, and it makes me
very unhappy. It'll take me days and days."

"Don't begin yet," said the Princess. "You'll have plenty of time to be
unhappy when I'm not with you. Tell me all about yourself."

So he did. And then she told him all about herself.

"I know I've been here a long time," she said, "but I don't know what
Time is. And I am very busy sewing silk flowers on a golden gown for my
wedding day. And the griffin does the housework--his wings are so
convenient and feathery for sweeping and dusting. And the dragon does
the cooking--he's hot inside, so, of course, it's no trouble to him; and
though I don't know what Time is I'm sure it's time for my wedding day,
because my golden gown only wants one more white daisy on the sleeve,
and a lily on the bosom of it, and then it will be ready."

Just then they heard a dry, rustling clatter on the rocks above them and
a snorting sound. "It's the dragon," said the Princess hurriedly.
"Good-bye. Be a good boy, and get your sum done." And she ran away and
left him to his arithmetic.

Now, the sum was this: "If the whirlpools stop and the tide goes down
once in every twenty-four hours, and they do it five minutes earlier
every twenty-four hours, and if the dragon sleeps every day, and he does
it three minutes later every day, in how many days and at what time in
the day will the tide go down three minutes before the dragon falls
asleep?"

It is quite a simple sum, as you see: You could do it in a minute
because you have been to a good school and have taken pains with your
lessons; but it was quite otherwise with poor Nigel. He sat down to work
out his sum with a piece of chalk on a smooth stone. He tried it by
practice and the unitary method, by multiplication, and by
rule-of-three-and-three-quarters. He tried it by decimals and by
compound interest. He tried it by square root and by cube root. He tried
it by addition, simple and otherwise, and he tried it by mixed examples
in vulgar fractions. But it was all of no use. Then he tried to do the
sum by algebra, by simple and by quadratic equations, by trigonometry,
by logarithms, and by conic sections. But it would not do. He got an
answer every time, it is true, but it was always a different one, and he
could not feel sure which answer was right.

And just as he was feeling how much more important than anything else it
is to be able to do your sums, the Princess came back. And now it was
getting dark.

"Why, you've been seven hours over that sum," she said, "and you haven't
done it yet. Look here, this is what is written on the tablet of the
statue by the lower gate. It has figures in it. Perhaps it is the answer
to the sum."

She held out to him a big white magnolia leaf. And she had scratched on
it with the pin of her pearl brooch, and it had turned brown where she
had scratched it, as magnolia leaves will do. Nigel read:

        AFTER NINE DAYS
        T ii. 24.
        D ii. 27 Ans.
        P.S.--And the griffin is artificial. R.

He clapped his hands softly.

"Dear Princess," he said, "I know that's the right answer. It says R
too, you see. But I'll just prove it." So he hastily worked the sum
backward in decimals and equations and conic sections, and all the rules
he could think of. And it came right every time.

"So now we must wait," said he. And they waited.

And every day the Princess came to see Nigel and brought him food cooked
by the dragon, and he lived in his cave, and talked to her when she was
there, and thought about her when she was not, and they were both as
happy as the longest day in summer. Then at last came The Day. Nigel and
the Princess laid their plans.

"You're sure he won't hurt you, my only treasure?" said Nigel.

"Quite," said the Princess. "I only wish I were half as sure that he
wouldn't hurt you."

"My Princess," he said tenderly, "two great powers are on our side: the
power of Love and the power of Arithmetic. Those two are stronger than
anything else in the world."

So when the tide began to go down, Nigel and the Princess ran out on to
the sands, and there, in full sight of the terrace where the dragon kept
watch, Nigel took his Princess in his arms and kissed her. The griffin
was busy sweeping the stairs of the Lone Tower, but the dragon saw, and
he gave a cry of rage--and it was like twenty engines all letting off
steam at the top of their voices inside Cannon Street Station.

And the two lovers stood looking up at the dragon. He was dreadful to
look at. His head was white with age--and his beard had grown so long
that he caught his claws in it as he walked. His wings were white with
the salt that had settled on them from the spray of the sea. His tail
was long and thick and jointed and white, and had little legs to it, any
number of them--far too many--so that it looked like a very large fat
silkworm; and his claws were as long as lessons and as sharp as
bayonets.

"Good-bye, love!" cried Nigel, and ran out across the yellow sand toward
the sea. He had one end of a cord tied to his arm.

The dragon was clambering down the face of the cliff, and next moment he
was crawling and writhing and sprawling and wriggling across the beach
after Nigel, making great holes in the sand with his heavy feet--and the
very end of his tail, where there were no legs, made, as it dragged, a
mark in the sand such as you make when you launch a boat; and he
breathed fire till the wet sand hissed again, and the water of the
little rock pools got quite frightened, and all went off in steam.

Still Nigel held on and the dragon after him. The Princess could see
nothing for the steam, and she stood crying bitterly, but still holding
on tight with her right hand to the other end of the cord that Nigel had
told her to hold; while with her left she held the ship's chronometer,
and looked at it through her tears as he had bidden her look, so as to
know when to pull the rope.

On went Nigel over the sand, and on went the dragon after him. And the
tide was low, and sleepy little waves lapped the sand's edge.

Now at the lip of the water, Nigel paused and looked back, and the
dragon made a bound, beginning a scream of rage that was like all the
engines of all the railways in England. But it never uttered the second
half of that scream, for now it knew suddenly that it was sleepy--it
turned to hurry back to dry land, because sleeping near whirlpools is so
unsafe. But before it reached the shore sleep caught it and turned it to
stone. Nigel, seeing this, ran shoreward for his life--and the tide
began to flow in, and the time of the whirlpools' sleep was nearly over,
and he stumbled and he waded and he swam, and the Princess pulled for
dear life at the cord in her hand, and pulled him up on to the dry shelf
of rock just as the great sea dashed in and made itself once more into
the girdle of Nine Whirlpools all around the island.

But the dragon was asleep under the whirlpools, and when he woke up from
being asleep he found he was drowned, so there was an end of him.

"Now, there's only the griffin," said Nigel. And the Princess said:
"Yes--only--" And she kissed Nigel and went back to sew the last leaf of
the last lily on the bosom of her wedding gown. She thought and thought
of what was written on the stone about the griffin being artificial--and
next day she said to Nigel: "You know a griffin is half a lion and half
an eagle, and the other two halves when they've joined make the
leo-griff. But I've never seen him. Yet I have an idea."

So they talked it over and arranged everything.

When the griffin fell asleep that afternoon at teatime, Nigel went
softly behind him and trod on his tail, and at the same time the
Princess cried: "Look out! There's a lion behind you."

And the griffin, waking suddenly from his dreams, twisted his large
neck around to look for the lion, saw a lion's flank, and fastened its
eagle beak in it. For the griffin had been artificially made by the
King-enchanter, and the two halves had never really got used to each
other. So now the eagle half of the griffin, who was still rather
sleepy, believed that it was fighting a lion, and the lion part, being
half asleep, thought it was fighting an eagle, and the whole griffin in
its deep drowsiness hadn't the sense to pull itself together and
remember what it was made of. So the griffin rolled over and over, one
end of it fighting with the other, till the eagle end pecked the lion
end to death, and the lion end tore the eagle end with its claws till it
died. And so the griffin that was made of a lion and an eagle perished,
exactly as if it had been made of Kilkenny cats.

"Poor griffin," said the Princess, "it was very good at the housework. I
always liked it better than the dragon: It wasn't so hot-tempered."

At that moment there was a soft, silky rush behind the Princess, and
there was her mother, the Queen, who had slipped out of the stone statue
at the moment the griffin was dead, and now came hurrying to take her
dear daughter in her arms. The witch was clambering slowly off her
pedestal. She was a little stiff from standing still so long.

When they had all explained everything over and over to each other as
many times as was good for them, the witch said: "Well, but what about
the whirlpools?"

And Nigel said he didn't know. Then the witch said: "I'm not a witch
anymore. I'm only a happy old woman, but I know some things still. Those
whirlpools were made by the enchanter-King's dropping nine drops of his
blood into the sea. And his blood was so wicked that the sea has been
trying ever since to get rid of it, and that made the whirlpools. Now
you've only got to go out at low tide."

So Nigel understood and went out at low tide, and found in the sandy
hollow left by the first whirlpool a great red ruby. That was the first
drop of the wicked King's blood. The next day Nigel found another, and
next day another, and so on till the ninth day, and then the sea was as
smooth as glass.

The nine rubies were used afterwards in agriculture. You had only to
throw them out into a field if you wanted it plowed. Then the whole
surface of the land turned itself over in its anxiety to get rid of
something so wicked, and in the morning the field was found to be plowed
as thoroughly as any young man at Oxford. So the wicked King did some
good after all.

When the sea was smooth, ships came from far and wide, bringing people
to hear the wonderful story. And a beautiful palace was built, and the
Princess was married to Nigel in her gold dress, and they all lived
happily as long as was good for them.

The dragon still lies, a stone dragon on the sand, and at low tide the
little children play around him and over him. But the pieces that were
left of the griffin were buried under the herb-bed in the palace garden,
because it had been so good at housework, and it wasn't its fault that
it had been made so badly and put to such poor work as guarding a lady
from her lover.

I have no doubt that you will wish to know what the Princess lived on
during the long years when the dragon did the cooking. My dear, she
lived on her income--and that is a thing that a great many people would
like to be able to do.

[Illustration: "Little children play around him and over him." _See page
96._]




[Illustration: VI

THE DRAGON TAMERS]




VI. The Dragon Tamers


There was once an old, old castle--it was so old that its walls and
towers and turrets and gateways and arches had crumbled to ruins, and of
all its old splendor there were only two little rooms left; and it was
here that John the blacksmith had set up his forge. He was too poor to
live in a proper house, and no one asked any rent for the rooms in the
ruin, because all the lords of the castle were dead and gone this many a
year. So there John blew his bellows and hammered his iron and did all
the work which came his way. This was not much, because most of the
trade went to the mayor of the town, who was also a blacksmith in quite
a large way of business, and had his huge forge facing the square of the
town, and had twelve apprentices, all hammering like a nest of
woodpeckers, and twelve journeymen to order the apprentices about, and a
patent forge and a self-acting hammer and electric bellows, and all
things handsome about him. So of course the townspeople, whenever they
wanted a horse shod or a shaft mended, went to the mayor. John the
blacksmith struggled on as best he could, with a few odd jobs from
travelers and strangers who did not know what a superior forge the
mayor's was. The two rooms were warm and weather-tight, but not very
large; so the blacksmith got into the way of keeping his old iron, his
odds and ends, his fagots, and his twopence worth of coal in the great
dungeon down under the castle. It was a very fine dungeon indeed, with a
handsome vaulted roof and big iron rings whose staples were built into
the wall, very strong and convenient for tying captives to, and at one
end was a broken flight of wide steps leading down no one knew where.
Even the lords of the castle in the good old times had never known where
those steps led to, but every now and then they would kick a prisoner
down the steps in their lighthearted, hopeful way, and sure enough, the
prisoners never came back. The blacksmith had never dared to go beyond
the seventh step, and no more have I--so I know no more than he did what
was at the bottom of those stairs.

John the blacksmith had a wife and a little baby. When his wife was not
doing the housework she used to nurse the baby and cry, remembering the
happy days when she lived with her father, who kept seventeen cows and
lived quite in the country, and when John used to come courting her in
the summer evenings, as smart as smart, with a posy in his buttonhole.
And now John's hair was getting gray, and there was hardly ever enough
to eat.

As for the baby, it cried a good deal at odd times; but at night, when
its mother had settled down to sleep, it would always begin to cry,
quite as a matter of course, so that she hardly got any rest at all.
This made her very tired.

The baby could make up for its bad nights during the day if it liked,
but the poor mother couldn't. So whenever she had nothing to do she used
to sit and cry, because she was tired out with work and worry.

One evening the blacksmith was busy with his forge. He was making a
goat-shoe for the goat of a very rich lady, who wished to see how the
goat liked being shod, and also whether the shoe would come to fivepence
or sevenpence before she ordered the whole set. This was the only order
John had had that week. And as he worked his wife sat and nursed the
baby, who, for a wonder, was not crying.

Presently, over the noise of the bellows and over the clank of the iron,
there came another sound. The blacksmith and his wife looked at each
other.

"I heard nothing," said he.

"Neither did I," said she.

But the noise grew louder--and the two were so anxious not to hear it
that he hammered away at the goat-shoe harder than he had ever hammered
in his life, and she began to sing to the baby--a thing she had not had
the heart to do for weeks.

But through the blowing and hammering and singing the noise came louder
and louder, and the more they tried not to hear it, the more they had
to. It was like the noise of some great creature purring, purring,
purring--and the reason they did not want to believe they really heard
it was that it came from the great dungeon down below, where the old
iron was, and the firewood and the twopence worth of coal, and the
broken steps that went down into the dark and ended no one knew where.

"It can't be anything in the dungeon," said the blacksmith, wiping his
face. "Why, I shall have to go down there after more coals in a minute."

"There isn't anything there, of course. How could there be?" said his
wife. And they tried so hard to believe that there could be nothing
there that presently they very nearly did believe it.

Then the blacksmith took his shovel in one hand and his riveting hammer
in the other, and hung the old stable lantern on his little finger, and
went down to get the coals.

"I am not taking the hammer because I think there is something there,"
said he, "but it is handy for breaking the large lumps of coal."

"I quite understand," said his wife, who had brought the coal home in
her apron that very afternoon, and knew that it was all coal dust.

So he went down the winding stairs to the dungeon and stood at the
bottom of the steps, holding the lantern above his head just to see that
the dungeon really was empty, as usual. Half of it was empty as usual,
except for the old iron and odds and ends, and the firewood and the
coals. But the other side was not empty. It was quite full, and what it
was full of was Dragon.

"It must have come up those nasty broken steps from goodness knows
where," said the blacksmith to himself, trembling all over, as he tried
to creep back up the winding stairs.

But the dragon was too quick for him--it put out a great claw and caught
him by the leg, and as it moved it rattled like a great bunch of keys,
or like the sheet iron they make thunder out of in pantomimes.

"No you don't," said the dragon in a spluttering voice, like a damp
squib.

"Deary, deary me," said poor John, trembling more than ever in the claw
of the dragon. "Here's a nice end for a respectable blacksmith!"

The dragon seemed very much struck by this remark.

"Do you mind saying that again?" said he, quite politely.

So John said again, very distinctly:
"_Here_--_is_--_a_--_nice_--_end_--_for_--_a_--_respectable_--_blacksmith._"

"I didn't know," said the dragon. "Fancy now! You're the very man I
wanted."

"So I understood you to say before," said John, his teeth chattering.

"Oh, I don't mean what you mean," said the dragon, "but I should like
you to do a job for me. One of my wings has got some of the rivets out
of it just above the joint. Could you put that to rights?"

"I might, sir," said John, politely, for you must always be polite to a
possible customer, even if he be a dragon.

"A master craftsman--you are a master, of course?--can see in a minute
what's wrong," the dragon went on. "Just come around here and feel my
plates, will you?"

John timidly went around when the dragon took his claw away; and sure
enough, the dragon's wing was hanging loose, and several of the plates
near the joint certainly wanted riveting.

The dragon seemed to be made almost entirely of iron armor--a sort of
tawny, red-rust color it was; from damp, no doubt--and under it he
seemed to be covered with something furry.

All the blacksmith welled up in John's heart, and he felt more at ease.

"You could certainly do with a rivet or two, sir," said he. "In fact,
you want a good many."

"Well, get to work, then," said the dragon. "You mend my wing, and then
I'll go out and eat up all the town, and if you make a really smart job
of it I'll eat you last. There!"

"I don't want to be eaten last, sir," said John.

"Well then, I'll eat you first," said the dragon.

"I don't want that, sir, either," said John.

"Go on with you, you silly man," said the dragon, "you don't know your
own silly mind. Come, set to work."

"I don't like the job, sir," said John, "and that's the truth. I know
how easily accidents happen. It's all fair and smooth, and 'Please rivet
me, and I'll eat you last'--and then you get to work and you give a
gentleman a bit of a nip or a dig under his rivets--and then it's fire
and smoke, and no apologies will meet the case."

"Upon my word of honor as a dragon," said the other.

"I know you wouldn't do it on purpose, sir," said John, "but any
gentleman will give a jump and a sniff if he's nipped, and one of your
sniffs would be enough for me. Now, if you'd just let me fasten you up?"

"It would be so undignified," objected the dragon.

"We always fasten a horse up," said John, "and he's the 'noble animal.'"

"It's all very well," said the dragon, "but how do I know you'd untie me
again when you'd riveted me? Give me something in pledge. What do you
value most?"

"My hammer," said John. "A blacksmith is nothing without a hammer."

"But you'd want that for riveting me. You must think of something else,
and at once, or I'll eat you first."

At this moment the baby in the room above began to scream. Its mother
had been so quiet that it thought she had settled down for the night,
and that it was time to begin.

"Whatever's that?" said the dragon, starting so that every plate on his
body rattled.

"It's only the baby," said John.

"What's that?" asked the dragon. "Something you value?"

"Well, yes, sir, rather," said the blacksmith.

"Then bring it here," said the dragon, "and I'll take care of it till
you've done riveting me, and you shall tie me up."

"All right, sir," said John, "but I ought to warn you. Babies are poison
to dragons, so I don't deceive you. It's all right to touch--but don't
you go putting it into your mouth. I shouldn't like to see any harm come
to a nice-looking gentleman like you."

The dragon purred at this compliment and said: "All right, I'll be
careful. Now go and fetch the thing, whatever it is."

So John ran up the steps as quickly as he could, for he knew that if the
dragon got impatient before it was fastened, it could heave up the roof
of the dungeon with one heave of its back, and kill them all in the
ruins. His wife was asleep, in spite of the baby's cries; and John
picked up the baby and took it down and put it between the dragon's
front paws.

"You just purr to it, sir," he said, "and it'll be as good as gold."

So the dragon purred, and his purring pleased the baby so much that it
stopped crying.

Then John rummaged among the heap of old iron and found there some heavy
chains and a great collar that had been made in the days when men sang
over their work and put their hearts into it, so that the things they
made were strong enough to bear the weight of a thousand years, let
alone a dragon.

John fastened the dragon up with the collar and the chains, and when he
had padlocked them all on safely he set to work to find out how many
rivets would be needed.

"Six, eight, ten--twenty, forty," said he. "I haven't half enough rivets
in the shop. If you'll excuse me, sir, I'll step around to another forge
and get a few dozen. I won't be a minute."

[Illustration: "The dragon's purring pleased the baby." _See page
106._]

And off he went, leaving the baby between the dragon's fore-paws,
laughing and crowing with pleasure at the very large purr of it.

John ran as hard as he could into the town, and found the mayor and
corporation.

"There's a dragon in my dungeon," he said; "I've chained him up. Now
come and help to get my baby away."

And he told them all about it.

But they all happened to have engagements for that evening; so they
praised John's cleverness, and said they were quite content to leave the
matter in his hands.

"But what about my baby?" said John.

"Oh, well," said the mayor, "if anything should happen, you will always
be able to remember that your baby perished in a good cause."

So John went home again, and told his wife some of the tale.

"You've given the baby to the dragon!" she cried. "Oh, you unnatural
parent!"

"Hush," said John, and he told her some more. "Now," he said, "I'm going
down. After I've been down you can go, and if you keep your head the boy
will be all right."

So down went the blacksmith, and there was the dragon purring away with
all his might to keep the baby quiet.

"Hurry up, can't you?" he said. "I can't keep up this noise all night."

"I'm very sorry, sir," said the blacksmith, "but all the shops are shut.
The job must wait till the morning. And don't forget you've promised to
take care of that baby. You'll find it a little wearing, I'm afraid.
Good night, sir."

The dragon had purred till he was quite out of breath--so now he
stopped, and as soon as everything was quiet the baby thought everyone
must have settled for the night, and that it was time to begin to
scream. So it began.

"Oh, dear," said the dragon, "this is awful." He patted the baby with
his claw, but it screamed more than ever.

"And I am so tired too," said the dragon. "I did so hope I should have a
good night."

The baby went on screaming.

"There'll be no peace for me after this," said the dragon. "It's enough
to ruin one's nerves. Hush, then--did 'ums, then." And he tried to quiet
the baby as if it had been a young dragon. But when he began to sing
"Hush-a-by, Dragon," the baby screamed more and more and more. "I can't
keep it quiet," said the dragon; and then suddenly he saw a woman
sitting on the steps. "Here, I say," said he, "do you know anything
about babies?"

"I do, a little," said the mother.

"Then I wish you'd take this one, and let me get some sleep," said the
dragon, yawning. "You can bring it back in the morning before the
blacksmith comes."

So the mother picked up the baby and took it upstairs and told her
husband, and they went to bed happy, for they had caught the dragon and
saved the baby.

And next day John went down and explained carefully to the dragon
exactly how matters stood, and he got an iron gate with a grating to it
and set it up at the foot of the steps, and the dragon mewed furiously
for days and days, but when he found it was no good he was quiet.

So now John went to the mayor, and said: "I've got the dragon and I've
saved the town."

"Noble preserver," cried the mayor, "we will get up a subscription for
you, and crown you in public with a laurel wreath."

So the mayor put his name down for five pounds, and the corporation each
gave three, and other people gave their guineas and half guineas and
half crowns and crowns, and while the subscription was being made the
mayor ordered three poems at his own expense from the town poet to
celebrate the occasion. The poems were very much more admired,
especially by the mayor and corporation.

The first poem dealt with the noble conduct of the mayor in arranging to
have the dragon tied up. The second described the splendid assistance
rendered by the corporation. And the third expressed the pride and joy
of the poet in being permitted to sing such deeds, beside which the
actions of St. George must appear quite commonplace to all with a
feeling heart or a well-balanced brain.

When the subscription was finished there was a thousand pounds, and a
committee was formed to settle what should be done with it. A third of
it went to pay for a banquet to the mayor and corporation; another third
was spent in buying a gold collar with a dragon on it for the mayor and
gold medals with dragons on them for the corporation; and what was left
went in committee expenses.

So there was nothing for the blacksmith except the laurel wreath and the
knowledge that it really was he who had saved the town. But after this
things went a little better with the blacksmith. To begin with, the baby
did not cry so much as it had before. Then the rich lady who owned the
goat was so touched by John's noble action that she ordered a complete
set of shoes at 2 shillings, 4 pence, and even made it up to 2
shillings, 6 pence, in grateful recognition of his public-spirited
conduct. Then tourists used to come in breaks from quite a long way off,
and pay twopence each to go down the steps and peep through the iron
grating at the rusty dragon in the dungeon--and it was threepence extra
for each party if the blacksmith let off colored fire to see it by,
which, as the fire was extremely short, was twopence-halfpenny clear
profit every time. And the blacksmith's wife used to provide teas at
ninepence a head, and altogether things grew brighter week by week.

The baby--named John, after his father, and called Johnnie for
short--began presently to grow up. He was great friends with Tina, the
daughter of the whitesmith, who lived nearly opposite. She was a dear
little girl with yellow pigtails and blue eyes, and she was tired of
hearing the story of how Johnnie, when he was a baby, had been minded by
a real dragon.

The two children used to go together to peep through the iron grating at
the dragon, and sometimes they would hear him mew piteously. And they
would light a halfpenny's worth of colored fire to look at him by. And
they grew older and wiser.

At last one day the mayor and corporation, hunting the hare in their
gold gowns, came screaming back to the town gates with the news that a
lame, humpy giant, as big as a tin church, was coming over the marshes
toward the town.

"We're lost," said the mayor. "I'd give a thousand pounds to anyone who
could keep that giant out of the town. I know what he eats--by his
teeth."

No one seemed to know what to do. But Johnnie and Tina were listening,
and they looked at each other, and ran off as fast as their boots would
carry them.

They ran through the forge, and down the dungeon steps, and knocked at
the iron door. "Who's there?" said the dragon. "It's only us," said the
children.

And the dragon was so dull from having been alone for ten years that he
said: "Come in, dears."

"You won't hurt us, or breathe fire at us or anything?" asked Tina.

And the dragon said, "Not for worlds."

So they went in and talked to him, and told him what the weather was
like outside, and what there was in the papers, and at last Johnnie
said: "There's a lame giant in the town. He wants you."

"Does he?" said the dragon, showing his teeth. "If only I were out of
this!"

"If we let you loose you might manage to run away before he could catch
you."

"Yes, I might," answered the dragon, "but then again I mightn't."

"Why--you'd never fight him?" said Tina.

"No," said the dragon; "I'm all for peace, I am. You let me out, and
you'll see."

So the children loosed the dragon from the chains and the collar, and
he broke down one end of the dungeon and went out--only pausing at the
forge door to get the blacksmith to rivet his wing.

He met the lame giant at the gate of the town, and the giant banged on
the dragon with his club as if he were banging an iron foundry, and the
dragon behaved like a smelting works--all fire and smoke. It was a
fearful sight, and people watched it from a distance, falling off their
legs with the shock of every bang, but always getting up to look again.

At last the dragon won, and the giant sneaked away across the marshes,
and the dragon, who was very tired, went home to sleep, announcing his
intention of eating the town in the morning. He went back into his old
dungeon because he was a stranger in the town, and he did not know of
any other respectable lodging. Then Tina and Johnnie went to the mayor
and corporation and said, "The giant is settled. Please give us the
thousand pounds reward."

But the mayor said: "No, no, my boy. It is not you who have settled the
giant, it is the dragon. I suppose you have chained him up again? When
he comes to claim the reward he shall have it."

"He isn't chained up yet," said Johnnie. "Shall I send him to claim the
reward?"

But the mayor said he need not trouble; and now he offered a thousand
pounds to anyone who would get the dragon chained up again.

"I don't trust you," said Johnnie. "Look how you treated my father when
he chained up the dragon."

But the people who were listening at the door interrupted, and said that
if Johnnie could fasten up the dragon again they would turn out the
mayor and let Johnnie be mayor in his place. For they had been
dissatisfied with the mayor for some time, and thought they would like a
change.

So Johnnie said, "Done," and off he went, hand in hand with Tina, and
they called on all their little friends and said: "Will you help us to
save the town?"

And all the children said: "Yes, of course we will. What fun!"

"Well, then," said Tina, "you must all bring your basins of bread and
milk to the forge tomorrow at breakfast time."

"And if ever I am mayor," said Johnnie, "I will give a banquet, and you
shall be invited. And we'll have nothing but sweet things from beginning
to end."

All the children promised, and next morning Tina and Johnnie rolled
their big washing tub down the winding stair.

"What's that noise?" asked the dragon.

"It's only a big giant breathing," said Tina, "He's gone by now."

Then, when all the town children brought their bread and milk, Tina
emptied it into the wash tub, and when the tub was full Tina knocked at
the iron door with the grating in it and said: "May we come in?"

"Oh, yes," said the dragon, "it's very dull here."

So they went in, and with the help of nine other children they lifted
the washing tub in and set it down by the dragon. Then all the other
children went away, and Tina and Johnnie sat down and cried.

"What's this?" asked the dragon. "And what's the matter?"

"This is bread and milk," said Johnnie; "it's our breakfast--all of it."

"Well," said the dragon, "I don't see what you want with breakfast. I'm
going to eat everyone in the town as soon as I've rested a little."

"Dear Mr. Dragon," said Tina, "I wish you wouldn't eat us. How would you
like to be eaten yourself?"

"Not at all," the dragon confessed, "but nobody will eat me."

"I don't know," said Johnnie, "there's a giant--"

"I know. I fought with him, and licked him."

"Yes, but there's another come now--the one you fought was only this
one's little boy. This one is half as big again."

"He's seven times as big," said Tina.

"No, nine times," said Johnnie. "He's bigger than the steeple."

"Oh, dear," said the dragon. "I never expected this."

"And the mayor has told him where you are," Tina went on, "and he is
coming to eat you as soon as he has sharpened his big knife. The mayor
told him you were a wild dragon--but he didn't mind. He said he only ate
wild dragons--with bread sauce."

"That's tiresome," said the dragon. "And I suppose this sloppy stuff in
the tub is the bread sauce?"

The children said it was. "Of course," they added, "bread sauce is only
served with wild dragons. Tame ones are served with apple sauce and
onion stuffing. What a pity you're not a tame one: He'd never look at
you then," they said. "Good-bye, poor dragon, we shall never see you
again, and now you'll know what it's like to be eaten." And they began
to cry again.

"Well, but look here," said the dragon, "couldn't you pretend I was a
tame dragon? Tell the giant that I'm just a poor little timid tame
dragon that you kept for a pet."

"He'd never believe it," said Johnnie. "If you were our tame dragon we
should keep you tied up, you know. We shouldn't like to risk losing such
a dear, pretty pet."

Then the dragon begged them to fasten him up at once, and they did so:
with the collar and chains that were made years ago--in the days when
men sang over their work and made it strong enough to bear any strain.

And then they went away and told the people what they had done, and
Johnnie was made mayor, and had a glorious feast exactly as he had said
he would--with nothing in it but sweet things. It began with Turkish
delight and halfpenny buns, and went on with oranges, toffee, coconut
ice, peppermints, jam puffs, raspberry-noyeau, ice creams, and
meringues, and ended with bull's-eyes and gingerbread and acid drops.

This was all very well for Johnnie and Tina; but if you are kind
children with feeling hearts you will perhaps feel sorry for the poor
deceived, deluded dragon--chained up in the dull dungeon, with nothing
to do but to think over the shocking untruths that Johnnie had told him.

When he thought how he had been tricked, the poor captive dragon began
to weep--and the large tears fell down over his rusty plates. And
presently he began to feel faint, as people sometimes do when they have
been crying, especially if they have not had anything to eat for ten
years or so.

And then the poor creature dried his eyes and looked about him, and
there he saw the tub of bread and milk. So he thought, "If giants like
this damp, white stuff, perhaps I should like it too," and he tasted a
little, and liked it so much that he ate it all up.

And the next time the tourists came, and Johnnie let off the colored
fire, the dragon said shyly: "Excuse my troubling you, but could you
bring me a little more bread and milk?"

So Johnnie arranged that people should go around with carts every day to
collect the children's bread and milk for the dragon. The children were
fed at the town's expense--on whatever they liked; and they ate nothing
but cake and buns and sweet things, and they said the poor dragon was
very welcome to their bread and milk.

Now, when Johnnie had been mayor ten years or so he married Tina, and on
their wedding morning they went to see the dragon. He had grown quite
tame, and his rusty plates had fallen off in places, and underneath he
was soft and furry to stroke. So now they stroked him.

And he said, "I don't know how I could ever have liked eating anything
but bread and milk. I _am_ a tame dragon now, aren't I?" And when they
said that yes, he was, the dragon said: "I am so tame, won't you undo
me?" And some people would have been afraid to trust him, but Johnnie
and Tina were so happy on their wedding day that they could not believe
any harm of anyone in the world. So they loosened the chains, and the
dragon said: "Excuse me a moment, there are one or two little things I
should like to fetch," and he moved off to those mysterious steps and
went down them, out of sight into the darkness. And as he moved, more
and more of his rusty plates fell off.

In a few minutes they heard him clanking up the steps. He brought
something in his mouth--it was a bag of gold.

"It's no good to me," he said. "Perhaps you might find it useful." So
they thanked him very kindly.

"More where that came from," said he, and fetched more and more and
more, till they told him to stop. So now they were rich, and so were
their fathers and mothers. Indeed, everyone was rich, and there were no
more poor people in the town. And they all got rich without working,
which is very wrong; but the dragon had never been to school, as you
have, so he knew no better.

And as the dragon came out of the dungeon, following Johnnie and Tina
into the bright gold and blue of their wedding day, he blinked his eyes
as a cat does in the sunshine, and he shook himself, and the last of his
plates dropped off, and his wings with them, and he was just like a
very, very extra-sized cat. And from that day he grew furrier and
furrier, and he was the beginning of all cats. Nothing of the dragon
remained except the claws, which all cats have still, as you can easily
ascertain.

And I hope you see now how important it is to feed your cat with bread
and milk. If you were to let it have nothing to eat but mice and birds
it might grow larger and fiercer, and scalier and tailier, and get wings
and turn into the beginning of dragons. And then there would be all the
bother over again.

[Illustration: "He brought something in his mouth--it was a bag of
gold." _See page 116._]




[Illustration: VII

THE FIERY DRAGON]




VII. The Fiery Dragon,

or The Heart of Stone and the Heart of Gold


The little white Princess always woke in her little white bed when the
starlings began to chatter in the pearl gray morning. As soon as the
woods were awake, she used to run up the twisting turret-stairs with her
little bare feet, and stand on the top of the tower in her white
bed-gown, and kiss her hands to the sun and to the woods and to the
sleeping town, and say: "Good morning, pretty world!"

Then she would run down the cold stone steps and dress herself in her
short skirt and her cap and apron, and begin the day's work. She swept
the rooms and made the breakfast, she washed the dishes and she scoured
the pans, and all this she did because she was a real Princess. For of
all who should have served her, only one remained faithful--her old
nurse, who had lived with her in the tower all the Princess's life. And,
now the nurse was old and feeble, the Princess would not let her work
any more, but did all the housework herself, while Nurse sat still and
did the sewing, because this was a real Princess with skin like milk and
hair like flax and a heart like gold.

Her name was Sabrinetta, and her grandmother was Sabra, who married St.
George after he had killed the dragon, and by real rights all the
country belonged to her: the woods that stretched away to the mountains,
the downs that sloped down to the sea, the pretty fields of corn and
maize and rye, the olive orchards and the vineyards, and the little town
itself--with its towers and its turrets, its steep roofs and strange
windows--that nestled in the hollow between the sea, where the whirlpool
was, and the mountains, white with snow and rosy with sunrise.

But when her father and mother had died, leaving her cousin to take care
of the kingdom till she grew up, he, being a very evil Prince, took
everything away from her, and all the people followed him, and now
nothing was left her of all her possessions except the great dragon
proof tower that her grandfather, St. George, had built, and of all who
should have been her servants only the good nurse.

This was why Sabrinetta was the first person in all the land to get a
glimpse of the wonder.

Early, early, early, while all the townspeople were fast asleep, she ran
up the turret-steps and looked out over the field, and at the other side
of the field there was a green, ferny ditch and a rose-thorny hedge, and
then came the wood. And as Sabrinetta stood on her tower she saw a
shaking and a twisting of the rose-thorny hedge, and then something very
bright and shining wriggled out through it into the ferny ditch and back
again. It only came out for a minute, but she saw it quite plainly, and
she said to herself: "Dear me, what a curious, shiny, bright-looking
creature! If it were bigger, and if I didn't know that there have been
no fabulous monsters for quite a long time now, I should almost think it
was a dragon."

The thing, whatever it was, did look rather like a dragon--but then it
was too small; and it looked rather like a lizard--only then it was too
big. It was about as long as a hearthrug.

"I wish it had not been in such a hurry to get back into the wood," said
Sabrinetta. "Of course, it's quite safe for me, in my dragonproof tower;
but if it is a dragon, it's quite big enough to eat people, and today's
the first of May, and the children go out to get flowers in the wood."

When Sabrinetta had done the housework (she did not leave so much as a
speck of dust anywhere, even in the corneriest corner of the winding
stair) she put on her milk white, silky gown with the moon-daisies
worked on it, and went up to the top of her tower again.

Across the fields troops of children were going out to gather the may,
and the sound of their laughter and singing came up to the top of the
tower.

"I do hope it wasn't a dragon," said Sabrinetta.

The children went by twos and by threes and by tens and by twenties, and
the red and blue and yellow and white of their frocks were scattered on
the green of the field.

"It's like a green silk mantle worked with flowers," said the Princess,
smiling.

Then by twos and by threes, by tens and by twenties, the children
vanished into the wood, till the mantle of the field was left plain
green once more.

"All the embroidery is unpicked," said the Princess, sighing.

The sun shone, and the sky was blue, and the fields were quite green,
and all the flowers were very bright indeed, because it was May Day.

Then quite suddenly a cloud passed over the sun, and the silence was
broken by shrieks from far off; and, like a many-colored torrent, all
the children burst from the wood and rushed, a red and blue and yellow
and white wave, across the field, screaming as they ran. Their voices
came up to the Princess on her tower, and she heard the words threaded
on their screams like beads on sharp needles: "The dragon, the dragon,
the dragon! Open the gates! The dragon is coming! The fiery dragon!"

And they swept across the field and into the gate of the town, and the
Princess heard the gate bang, and the children were out of sight--but on
the other side of the field the rose-thorns crackled and smashed in the
hedge, and something very large and glaring and horrible trampled the
ferns in the ditch for one moment before it hid itself again in the
covert of the wood.

The Princess went down and told her nurse, and the nurse at once locked
the great door of the tower and put the key in her pocket.

"Let them take care of themselves," she said, when the Princess begged
to be allowed to go out and help to take care of the children. "My
business is to take care of you, my precious, and I'm going to do it.
Old as I am, I can turn a key still."

So Sabrinetta went up again to the top of her tower, and cried whenever
she thought of the children and the fiery dragon. For she knew, of
course, that the gates of the town were not dragonproof, and that the
dragon could just walk in whenever he liked.

The children ran straight to the palace, where the Prince was cracking
his hunting whip down at the kennels, and told him what had happened.

"Good sport," said the Prince, and he ordered out his pack of
hippopotamuses at once. It was his custom to hunt big game with
hippopotamuses, and people would not have minded that so much--but he
would swagger about in the streets of the town with his pack yelping and
gamboling at his heels, and when he did that, the green-grocer, who had
his stall in the marketplace, always regretted it; and the crockery
merchant, who spread his wares on the pavement, was ruined for life
every time the Prince chose to show off his pack.

The Prince rode out of the town with his hippopotamuses trotting and
frisking behind him, and people got inside their houses as quickly as
they could when they heard the voices of his pack and the blowing of his
horn. The pack squeezed through the town gates and off across country to
hunt the dragon. Few of you who had not seen a pack of hippopotamuses in
full cry will be able to imagine at all what the hunt was like. To begin
with, hippopotamuses do not bay like hounds: They grunt like pigs, and
their grunt is very big and fierce. Then, of course, no one expects
hippopotamuses to jump. They just crash through the hedges and lumber
through the standing corn, doing serious injury to the crops, and
annoying the farmers very much. All the hippopotamuses had collars with
their name and address on, but when the farmers called at the palace to
complain of the injury to their standing crops, the Prince always said
it served them right for leaving their crops standing about in people's
way, and he never paid anything at all.

So now, when he and his pack went out, several people in the town
whispered, "I wish the dragon would eat him"--which was very wrong of
them, no doubt, but then he was such a very nasty Prince.

They hunted by field, and they hunted by wold; they drew the woods
blank, and the scent didn't lie on the downs at all. The dragon was shy,
and would not show himself.

But just as the Prince was beginning to think there was no dragon at
all, but only a cock and bull, his favourite old hippopotamus gave
tongue. The Prince blew his horn and shouted: "Tally ho! Hark forward!
Tantivy!" and the whole pack charged downhill toward the hollow by the
wood. For there, plain to be seen, was the dragon, as big as a barge,
glowing like a furnace, and spitting fire and showing his shining teeth.

"The hunt is up!" cried the Prince. And indeed it was. For the
dragon--instead of behaving as a quarry should, and running away--ran
straight at the pack, and the Prince, on his elephant, had the
mortification of seeing his prize pack swallowed up one by one in the
twinkling of an eye, by the dragon they had come out to hunt. The dragon
swallowed all the hippopotamuses just as a dog swallows bits of meat. It
was a shocking sight. Of the whole of the pack that had come out
sporting so merrily to the music of the horn, now not even a
puppy-hippopotamus was left, and the dragon was looking anxiously around
to see if he had forgotten anything.

The Prince slipped off his elephant on the other side and ran into the
thickest part of the wood. He hoped the dragon could not break through
the bushes there, since they were very strong and close. He went
crawling on hands and knees in a most un-Prince-like way, and at last,
finding a hollow tree, he crept into it. The wood was very still--no
crashing of branches and no smell of burning came to alarm the Prince.
He drained the silver hunting bottle slung from his shoulder, and
stretched his legs in the hollow tree. He never shed a single tear for
his poor tame hippopotamuses who had eaten from his hand and followed
him faithfully in all the pleasures of the chase for so many years. For
he was a false Prince, with a skin like leather and hair like hearth
brushes and a heart like a stone. He never shed a tear, but he just went
to sleep.

When he awoke it was dark. He crept out of the tree and rubbed his eyes.
The wood was black about him, but there was a red glow in a dell close
by. It was a fire of sticks, and beside it sat a ragged youth with long,
yellow hair; all around lay sleeping forms which breathed heavily.

"Who are you?" said the Prince.

"I'm Elfin, the pig keeper," said the ragged youth. "And who are you?"

"I'm Tiresome, the Prince," said the other.

"And what are you doing out of your palace at this time of night?" asked
the pig keeper, severely.

"I've been hunting," said the Prince.

The pig keeper laughed. "Oh, it was you I saw, then? A good hunt, wasn't
it? My pigs and I were looking on."

All the sleeping forms grunted and snored, and the Prince saw that they
were pigs: He knew it by their manners.

"If you had known as much as I do," Elfin went on, "you might have saved
your pack."

"What do you mean?" said Tiresome.

"Why, the dragon," said Elfin. "You went out at the wrong time of day.
The dragon should be hunted at night."

"No, thank you," said the Prince, with a shudder. "A daylight hunt is
quite good enough for me, you silly pig keeper."

"Oh, well," said Elfin, "do as you like about it--the dragon will come
and hunt you tomorrow, as likely as not. I don't care if he does, you
silly Prince."

"You're very rude," said Tiresome.

"Oh, no, only truthful," said Elfin.

"Well, tell me the truth, then. What is it that, if I had known as much
as you do about, I shouldn't have lost my hippopotamuses?"

"You don't speak very good English," said Elfin. "But come, what will
you give me if I tell you?"

"If you tell me what?" said the tiresome Prince.

"What you want to know."

"I don't want to know anything," said Prince Tiresome.

"Then you're more of a silly even than I thought," said Elfin. "Don't
you want to know how to settle the dragon before he settles you?"

"It might be as well," the Prince admitted.

"Well, I haven't much patience at any time," said Elfin, "and now I can
assure you that there's very little left. What will you give me if I
tell you?"

"Half my kingdom," said the Prince, "and my cousin's hand in marriage."

"Done," said the pig keeper. "Here goes! The dragon grows small at
night! He sleeps under the root of this tree. I use him to light my fire
with."

And, sure enough, there under the tree was the dragon on a nest of
scorched moss, and he was about as long as your finger.

"How can I kill him?" asked the Prince.

"I don't know that you can kill him," said Elfin, "but you can take him
away if you've brought anything to put him in. That bottle of yours
would do."

So between them they managed, with bits of stick and by singeing their
fingers a little, to poke and shove the dragon till they made it creep
into the silver hunting bottle, and then the Prince screwed on the top
tight.

"Now we've got him," said Elfin. "Let's take him home and put Solomon's
seal on the mouth of the bottle, and then he'll be safe enough. Come
along--we'll divide up the kingdom tomorrow, and then I shall have some
money to buy fine clothes to go courting in."

But when the wicked Prince made promises he did not make them to keep.

"Go on with you! What do you mean?" he said. "I found the dragon and
I've imprisoned him. I never said a word about courtings or kingdoms. If
you say I did, I shall cut your head off at once." And he drew his
sword.

"All right," said Elfin, shrugging his shoulders. "I'm better off than
you are, anyhow."

"What do you mean?" spluttered the Prince.

"Why, you've only got a kingdom (and a dragon), but I've got clean hands
(and five and seventy fine black pigs)."

So Elfin sat down again by his fire, and the Prince went home and told
his Parliament how clever and brave he had been, and though he woke them
up on purpose to tell them, they were not angry, but said: "You are
indeed brave and clever." For they knew what happened to people with
whom the Prince was not pleased.

Then the Prime Minister solemnly put Solomon's seal on the mouth of the
bottle, and the bottle was put in the Treasury, which was the strongest
building in the town, and was made of solid copper, with walls as thick
as Waterloo Bridge.

The bottle was set down among the sacks of gold, and the junior
secretary to the junior clerk of the last Lord of the Treasury was
appointed to sit up all night with it and see if anything happened. The
junior secretary had never seen a dragon, and, what was more, he did not
believe the Prince had ever seen a dragon either. The Prince had never
been a really truthful boy, and it would have been just like him to
bring home a bottle with nothing in it and then to pretend that there
was a dragon inside. So the junior secretary did not at all mind being
left. They gave him the key, and when everyone in the town had gone back
to bed he let in some of the junior secretaries from other Government
departments, and they had a jolly game of hide-and-seek among the sacks
of gold, and played marbles with the diamonds and rubies and pearls in
the big ivory chests.

They enjoyed themselves very much, but by-and-by the copper treasury
began to get warmer and warmer, and suddenly the junior secretary cried
out, "Look at the bottle!"

The bottle sealed with Solomon's seal had swollen to three times its
proper size and seemed to be nearly red hot, and the air got warmer and
warmer and the bottle bigger and bigger, till all the junior secretaries
agreed that the place was too hot to hold them, and out they went,
tumbling over each other in their haste, and just as the last got out
and locked the door the bottle burst, and out came the dragon, very
fiery, and swelling more and more every minute, and he began to eat the
sacks of gold and crunch up the pearls and diamonds and rubies as if
they were sugar.

By breakfasttime he had devoured the whole of the Prince's treasures,
and when the Prince came along the street at about eleven, he met the
dragon coming out of the broken door of the Treasury, with molten gold
still dripping from his jaws. Then the Prince turned and ran for his
life, and as he ran toward the dragonproof tower the little white
Princess saw him coming, and she ran down and unlocked the door and let
him in, and slammed the dragonproof door in the fiery face of the
dragon, who sat down and whined outside, because he wanted the Prince
very much indeed.

The Princess took Prince Tiresome into the best room, and laid the
cloth, and gave him cream and eggs and white grapes and honey and bread,
with many other things, yellow and white and good to eat, and she served
him just as kindly as she would have done if he had been anyone else
instead of the bad Prince who had taken away her kingdom and kept it for
himself--because she was a true Princess and had a heart of gold.

When he had eaten and drunk, he begged the Princess to show him how to
lock and unlock the door. The nurse was asleep, so there was no one to
tell the Princess not to, and she did.

[Illustration: "The junior secretary cried out, 'Look at the bottle!'"
_See page 129._]

"You turn the key like this," she said, "and the door keeps shut. But
turn it nine times around the wrong way, and the door flies open."

And so it did. And the moment it opened, the Prince pushed the white
Princess out of her tower, just as he had pushed her out of her kingdom,
and shut the door. For he wanted to have the tower all for himself. And
there she was, in the street, and on the other side of the way the
dragon was sitting whining, but he did not try to eat her,
because--though the old nurse did not know it--dragons cannot eat white
Princesses with hearts of gold.

The Princess could not walk through the streets of the town in her
milky-silky gown with the daisies on it, and with no hat and no gloves,
so she turned the other way, and ran out across the meadows, toward the
wood. She had never been out of her tower before, and the soft grass
under her feet felt like grass of Paradise.

She ran right into the thickest part of the wood, because she did not
know what her heart was made of, and she was afraid of the dragon, and
there in a dell she came on Elfin and his five and seventy fine pigs. He
was playing his flute, and around him the pigs were dancing cheerfully
on their hind legs.

"Oh, dear," said the Princess, "do take care of me. I am so frightened."

"I will," said Elfin, putting his arms around her. "Now you are quite
safe. What were you frightened of?"

"The dragon," she said.

"So it's gotten out of the silver bottle," said Elfin. "I hope it's
eaten the Prince."

"No," said Sabrinetta. "But why?"

He told her of the mean trick that the Prince had played on him.

"And he promised me half his kingdom and the hand of his cousin the
Princess," said Elfin.

"Oh, dear, what a shame!" said Sabrinetta, trying to get out of his
arms. "How dare he?"

"What's the matter?" he asked, holding her tighter. "It _was_ a shame,
or at least _I_ thought so. But now he may keep his kingdom, half and
whole, if I may keep what I have."

"What's that?" asked the Princess.

"Why, you--my pretty, my dear," said Elfin, "and as for the Princess,
his cousin--forgive me, dearest heart, but when I asked for her I hadn't
seen the real Princess, the _only_ Princess, _my_ Princess."

"Do you mean me?" said Sabrinetta.

"Who else?" he asked.

"Yes, but five minutes ago you hadn't seen me!"

"Five minutes ago I was a pig keeper--now I've held you in my arms I'm a
Prince, though I should have to keep pigs to the end of my days."

"But you haven't asked _me_," said the Princess.

"You asked me to take care of you," said Elfin, "and I will--all my life
long."

So that was settled, and they began to talk of really important things,
such as the dragon and the Prince, and all the time Elfin did not know
that this was the Princess, but he knew that she had a heart of gold,
and he told her so, many times.

"The mistake," said Elfin, "was in not having a dragonproof bottle. I
see that now."

"Oh, is that all?" said the Princess. "I can easily get you one of
those--because everything in my tower is dragonproof. We ought to do
something to settle the dragon and save the little children."

So she started off to get the bottle, but she would not let Elfin come
with her.

"If what you say is true," she said, "if you are sure that I have a
heart of gold, the dragon won't hurt me, and somebody must stay with the
pigs."

Elfin was quite sure, so he let her go.

She found the door of her tower open. The dragon had waited patiently
for the Prince, and the moment he opened the door and came out--though
he was only out for an instant to post a letter to his Prime Minister
saying where he was and asking them to send the fire brigade to deal
with the fiery dragon--the dragon ate him. Then the dragon went back to
the wood, because it was getting near his time to grow small for the
night.

So Sabrinetta went in and kissed her nurse and made her a cup of tea and
explained what was going to happen, and that she had a heart of gold, so
the dragon couldn't eat her; and the nurse saw that of course the
Princess was quite safe, and kissed her and let her go.

She took the dragonproof bottle, made of burnished brass, and ran back
to the wood, and to the dell, where Elfin was sitting among his sleek
black pigs, waiting for her.

"I thought you were never coming back," he said. "You have been away a
year, at least."

The Princess sat down beside him among the pigs, and they held each
other's hands till it was dark, and then the dragon came crawling over
the moss, scorching it as he came, and getting smaller as he crawled,
and curled up under the root of the tree.

"Now then," said Elfin, "you hold the bottle." Then he poked and prodded
the dragon with bits of stick till it crawled into the dragonproof
bottle. But there was no stopper.

"Never mind," said Elfin. "I'll put my finger in for a stopper."

"No, let me," said the Princess. But of course Elfin would not let her.
He stuffed his finger into the top of the bottle, and the Princess cried
out: "The sea--the sea--run for the cliffs!" And off they went, with the
five and seventy pigs trotting steadily after them in a long black
procession.

The bottle got hotter and hotter in Elfin's hands, because the dragon
inside was puffing fire and smoke with all his might--hotter and hotter
and hotter--but Elfin held on till they came to the cliff edge, and
there was the dark blue sea, and the whirlpool going around and around.

Elfin lifted the bottle high above his head and hurled it out between
the stars and the sea, and it fell in the middle of the whirlpool.

"We've saved the country," said the Princess. "You've saved the little
children. Give me your hands."

"I can't," said Elfin. "I shall never be able to take your dear hands
again. My hands are burnt off."

And so they were: There were only black cinders where his hands ought to
have been. The Princess kissed them, and cried over them, and tore
pieces of her silky-milky gown to tie them up with, and the two went
back to the tower and told the nurse all about everything. And the pigs
sat outside and waited.

"He is the bravest man in the world," said Sabrinetta. "He has saved the
country and the little children; but, oh, his hands--his poor, dear,
darling hands!"

Here the door of the room opened, and the oldest of the five and seventy
pigs came in. It went up to Elfin and rubbed itself against him with
little loving grunts.

"See the dear creature," said the nurse, wiping away a tear. "It knows,
it knows!"

Sabrinetta stroked the pig, because Elfin had no hands for stroking or
for anything else.

"The only cure for a dragon burn," said the old nurse, "is pig's fat,
and well that faithful creature knows it----"

"I wouldn't for a kingdom," cried Elfin, stroking the pig as best he
could with his elbow.

"Is there no other cure?" asked the Princess.

Here another pig put its black nose in at the door, and then another and
another, till the room was full of pigs, a surging mass of rounded
blackness, pushing and struggling to get at Elfin, and grunting softly
in the language of true affection.

"There is one other," said the nurse. "The dear, affectionate
beasts--they all want to die for you."

"What is the other cure?" said Sabrinetta anxiously.

"If a man is burnt by a dragon," said the nurse, "and a certain number
of people are willing to die for him, it is enough if each should kiss
the burn and wish it well in the depths of his loving heart."

"The number! The number!" cried Sabrinetta.

"Seventy-seven," said the nurse.

"We have only seventy-five pigs," said the Princess, "and with me that's
seventy-six!"

"It must be seventy-seven--and I really can't die for him, so nothing
can be done," said the nurse, sadly. "He must have cork hands."

"I knew about the seventy-seven loving people," said Elfin. "But I never
thought my dear pigs loved me so much as all this, and my dear too--and,
of course, that only makes it more impossible. There's one other charm
that cures dragon burns, though; but I'd rather be burnt black all over
than marry anyone but you, my dear, my pretty."

"Why, who must you marry to cure your dragon burns?" asked Sabrinetta.

"A Princess. That's how St. George cured his burns."

"There now! Think of that!" said the nurse. "And I never heard tell of
that cure, old as I am."

But Sabrinetta threw her arms round Elfin's neck, and held him as though
she would never let him go.

"Then it's all right, my dear, brave, precious Elfin," she cried, "for I
am a Princess, and you shall be my Prince. Come along, Nurse--don't wait
to put on your bonnet. We'll go and be married this very moment."

So they went, and the pigs came after, moving in stately blackness, two
by two. And, the minute he was married to the Princess, Elfin's hands
got quite well. And the people, who were weary of Prince Tiresome and
his hippopotamuses, hailed Sabrinetta and her husband as rightful
Sovereigns of the land.

[Illustration: "They saw a cloud of steam." _See page 135._]

Next morning the Prince and Princess went out to see if the dragon had
been washed ashore. They could see nothing of him; but when they looked
out toward the whirlpool they saw a cloud of steam; and the fishermen
reported that the water for miles around was hot enough to shave with!
And as the water is hot there to this day, we may feel pretty sure
that the fierceness of that dragon was such that all the waters of all
the sea were not enough to cool him. The whirlpool is too strong for him
to be able to get out of it, so there he spins around and around forever
and ever, doing some useful work at last, and warming the water for poor
fisher-folk to shave with.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Prince and Princess rule the land well and wisely. The nurse lives
with them, and does nothing but fine sewing, and only that when she
wants to very much. The Prince keeps no hippopotamuses, and is
consequently very popular. The five and seventy devoted pigs live in
white marble sties with brass knockers and Pig on the doorplate, and are
washed twice a day with Turkish sponges and soap scented with violets,
and no one objects to their following the Prince when he walks abroad,
for they behave beautifully, and always keep to the footpath, and obey
the notices about not walking on the grass. The Princess feeds them
every day with her own hands, and her first edict on coming to the
throne was that the word _pork_ should never be uttered on pain of
death, and should, besides, be scratched out of all the dictionaries.




[Illustration: VIII

KIND LITTLE EDMUND]




VIII. Kind Little Edmund, or The Caves and the Cockatrice


Edmund was a boy. The people who did not like him said that he was the
most tiresome boy that ever lived, but his grandmother and his other
friends said that he had an inquiring mind. And his granny often added
that he was the best of boys. But she was very kind and very old.

Edmund loved to find out about things. Perhaps you will think that in
that case he was constant in his attendance at school, since there, if
anywhere, we may learn whatever there is to be learned. But Edmund did
not want to learn things: He wanted to find things out, which is quite
different. His inquiring mind led him to take clocks to pieces to see
what made them go, to take locks off doors to see what made them stick.
It was Edmund who cut open the India rubber ball to see what made it
bounce, and he never did see, any more than you did when you tried the
same experiment.

Edmund lived with his grandmother. She loved him very much, in spite of
his inquiring mind, and hardly scolded him at all when he frizzled up
her tortoiseshell comb in his anxiety to find out whether it was made of
real tortoiseshell or of something that would burn. Edmund went to
school, of course, now and then, and sometimes he could not prevent
himself from learning something, but he never did it on purpose.

"It is such waste of time," said he. "They only know what everybody
knows. I want to find out new things that nobody has thought of but me."

"I don't think you're likely to find out anything that none of the wise
men in the whole world have thought of all these thousands of years,"
said Granny.

But Edmund did not agree with her. He played truant whenever he could,
for he was a kindhearted boy, and could not bear to think of a master's
time and labor being thrown away on a boy like himself--who did not wish
to learn, only to find out--when there were so many worthy lads
thirsting for instruction in geography and history and reading and
ciphering, and Mr. Smiles's "Self-Help."

Other boys played truant too, of course--and these went nutting or
blackberrying or wild plum gathering, but Edmund never went on the side
of the town where the green woods and hedges grew. He always went up the
mountain where the great rocks were, and the tall, dark pine trees, and
where other people were afraid to go because of the strange noises that
came out of the caves.

Edmund was not afraid of these noises--though they were very strange and
terrible. He wanted to find out what made them.

One day he did. He had invented, all by himself, a very ingenious and
new kind of lantern, made with a turnip and a tumbler, and when he took
the candle out of Granny's bedroom candlestick to put in it, it gave
quite a splendid light.

He had to go to school next day, and he was caned for being absent
without leave--although he very straightforwardly explained that he had
been too busy making the lantern to have time to come to school.

But the day after he got up very early and took the lunch Granny had
ready for him to take to school--two boiled eggs and an apple
turnover--and he took his lantern and went off as straight as a dart to
the mountains to explore the caves.

The caves were very dark, but his lantern lighted them up beautifully;
and they were most interesting caves, with stalactites and stalagmites
and fossils, and all the things you read about in the instructive books
for the young. But Edmund did not care for any of these things just
then. He wanted to find out what made the noises that people were afraid
of, and there was nothing in the caves to tell him.

Presently he sat down in the biggest cave and listened very carefully,
and it seemed to him that he could distinguish three different sorts of
noises. There was a heavy rumbling sound, like a very large old
gentleman asleep after dinner; and there was a smaller sort of rumble
going on at the same time; and there was a sort of crowing, clucking
sound, such as a chicken might make if it happened to be as big as a
haystack.

"It seems to me," said Edmund to himself, "that the clucking is nearer
than the others." So he started up again and explored the caves once
more. He found out nothing, but about halfway up the wall of the cave,
he saw a hole. And, being a boy, he climbed up to it and crept in; and
it was the entrance to a rocky passage. And now the clucking sounded
more plainly than before, and he could hardly hear the rumbling at all.

"I _am_ going to find out something at last," said Edmund, and on he
went. The passage wound and twisted, and twisted and turned, and turned
and wound, but Edmund kept on.

"My lantern's burning better and better," said he presently, but the
next minute he saw that all the light did not come from his lantern. It
was a pale yellow light, and it shone down the passage far ahead of him
through what looked like the chink of a door.

"I expect it's the fire in the middle of the earth," said Edmund, who
had not been able to help learning about that at school.

But quite suddenly the fire ahead gave a pale flicker and went down; and
the clucking ceased.

The next moment Edmund turned a corner and found himself in front of a
rocky door. The door was ajar. He went in, and there was a round cave,
like the dome of St. Paul's. In the middle of the cave was a hole like a
very big hand-washing basin, and in the middle of the basin Edmund saw
a large pale person sitting.

This person had a man's face and a griffin's body, and big feathery
wings, and a snake's tail, and a cock's comb and neck feathers.

"Whatever are you?" said Edmund.

"I'm a poor starving cockatrice," answered the pale person in a very
faint voice, "and I shall die--oh, I know I shall! My fire's gone out! I
can't think how it happened; I must have been asleep. I have to stir it
seven times round with my tail once in a hundred years to keep it
alight, and my watch must have been wrong. And now I shall die."

I think I have said before what a kindhearted boy Edmund was.

"Cheer up," said he. "I'll light your fire for you." And off he went,
and in a few minutes he came back with a great armful of sticks from the
pine trees outside, and with these and a lesson book or two that he had
forgotten to lose before, and which, quite by an oversight, were safe in
his pocket, he lit a fire all around the cockatrice. The wood blazed up,
and presently something in the basin caught fire, and Edmund saw that it
was a sort of liquid that burned like the brandy in a snapdragon. And
now the cockatrice stirred it with his tail and flapped his wings in it
so that some of it splashed out on Edmund's hand and burnt it rather
badly. But the cockatrice grew red and strong and happy, and its comb
grew scarlet, and its feathers glossy, and it lifted itself up and
crowed "Cock-a-trice-a-doodle-doo!" very loudly and clearly.

Edmund's kindly nature was charmed to see the cockatrice so much
improved in health, and he said: "Don't mention it; delighted, I'm
sure," when the cockatrice began to thank him.

"But what can I do for you?" said the creature.

"Tell me stories," said Edmund.

"What about?" said the cockatrice.

"About true things that they don't know at school," said Edmund.

So the cockatrice began, and he told him about mines and treasures and
geological formations, and about gnomes and fairies and dragons, and
about glaciers and the Stone Age and the beginning of the world, and
about the unicorn and the phoenix, and about Magic, black and white.

And Edmund ate his eggs and his turnover, and listened. And when he got
hungry again he said good-bye and went home. But he came again the next
day for more stories, and the next day, and the next, for a long time.

He told the boys at school about the cockatrice and his wonderful true
tales, and the boys liked the stories; but when he told the master he
was caned for untruthfulness.

"But it's true," said Edmund. "Just you look where the fire burnt my
hand."

"I see you've been playing with fire--into mischief as usual," said the
master, and he caned Edmund harder than ever. The master was ignorant
and unbelieving: but I am told that some schoolmasters are not like
that.

Now, one day Edmund made a new lantern out of something chemical that he
sneaked from the school laboratory. And with it he went exploring again
to see if he could find the things that made the other sorts of noises.
And in quite another part of the mountain he found a dark passage, all
lined with brass, so that it was like the inside of a huge telescope,
and at the very end of it he found a bright green door. There was a
brass plate on the door that said MRS. D. KNOCK AND RING, and a white
label that said CALL ME AT THREE. Edmund had a watch: It had been given
to him on his birthday two days before, and he had not yet had time to
take it to pieces and see what made it go, so it was still going. He
looked at it now. It said a quarter to three.

Did I tell you before what a kindhearted boy Edmund was? He sat down on
the brass doorstep and waited till three o'clock. Then he knocked and
rang, and there was a rattling and puffing inside. The great door flew
open, and Edmund had only just time to hide behind it when out came an
immense yellow dragon, who wriggled off down the brass cave like a long,
rattling worm--or perhaps more like a monstrous centipede.

Edmund crept slowly out and saw the dragon stretching herself on the
rocks in the sun, and he crept past the great creature and tore down the
hill into the town and burst into school, crying out: "There's a great
dragon coming! Somebody ought to do something, or we shall all be
destroyed."

He was caned for untruthfulness without any delay. His master was never
one for postponing a duty.

"But it's true," said Edmund. "You just see if it isn't."

He pointed out of the window, and everyone could see a vast yellow cloud
rising up into the air above the mountain.

"It's only a thunder shower," said the master, and caned Edmund more
than ever. This master was not like some masters I know: He was very
obstinate, and would not believe his own eyes if they told him anything
different from what he had been saying before his eyes spoke.

So while the master was writing _Lying is very wrong, and liars must be
caned. It is all for their own good_ on the black-board for Edmund to
copy out seven hundred times, Edmund sneaked out of school and ran for
his life across the town to warn his granny, but she was not at home. So
then he made off through the back door of the town, and raced up the
hill to tell the cockatrice and ask for his help. It never occurred to
him that the cockatrice might not believe him. You see, he had heard so
many wonderful tales from him and had believed them all--and when you
believe all a person's stories they ought to believe yours. This is only
fair.

At the mouth of the cockatrice's cave Edmund stopped, very much out of
breath, to look back at the town. As he ran he had felt his little legs
tremble and shake, while the shadows of the great yellow cloud fell upon
him. Now he stood once more between warm earth and blue sky, and looked
down on the green plain dotted with fruit trees and red-roofed farms
and plots of gold corn. In the middle of that plain the gray town lay,
with its strong walls with the holes pierced for the archers, and its
square towers with holes for dropping melted lead on the heads of
strangers; its bridges and its steeples; the quiet river edged with
willow and alder; and the pleasant green garden place in the middle of
the town, where people sat on holidays to smoke their pipes and listen
to the band.

Edmund saw it all; and he saw, too, creeping across the plain, marking
her way by a black line as everything withered at her touch, the great
yellow dragon--and he saw that she was many times bigger than the whole
town.

"Oh, my poor, dear granny," said Edmund, for he had a feeling heart, as
I ought to have told you before.

The yellow dragon crept nearer and nearer, licking her greedy lips with
her long red tongue, and Edmund knew that in the school his master was
still teaching earnestly and still not believing Edmund's tale the least
little bit.

"He'll jolly well have to believe it soon, anyhow," said Edmund to
himself, and though he was a very tender-hearted boy--I think it only
fair to tell you that he was this--I am afraid he was not as sorry as he
ought to have been to think of the way in which his master was going to
learn how to believe what Edmund said. Then the dragon opened her jaws
wider and wider and wider. Edmund shut his eyes, for though his master
was in the town, the amiable Edmund shrank from beholding the awful
sight.

When he opened his eyes again there was no town--only a bare place where
it had stood, and the dragon licking her lips and curling herself up to
go to sleep, just as Kitty does when she has quite finished with a
mouse. Edmund gasped once or twice, and then ran into the cave to tell
the cockatrice.

"Well," said the cockatrice thoughtfully, when the tale had been told.
"What then?"

"I don't think you quite understand," said Edmund gently. "The dragon
has swallowed up the town."

"Does it matter?" said the cockatrice.

[Illustration: "Creeping across the plain." _See page 147._]

"But I live there," said Edmund blankly.

"Never mind," said the cockatrice, turning over in the pool of fire to
warm its other side, which was chilly, because Edmund had, as usual,
forgotten to close the cave door. "You can live here with me."

"I'm afraid I haven't made my meaning clear," said Edmund patiently.
"You see, my granny is in the town, and I can't bear to lose my granny
like this."

"I don't know what a granny may be," said the cockatrice, who seemed to
be growing weary of the subject, "but if it's a possession to which you
attach any importance----"

"Of course it is," said Edmund, losing patience at last. "Oh--do help
me. What can I do?"

"If I were you," said his friend, stretching itself out in the pool of
flame so that the waves covered him up to his chin, "I should find the
drakling and bring it here."

"But why?" said Edmund. He had gotten into the habit of asking why at
school, and the master had always found it trying. As for the
cockatrice, he was not going to stand that sort of thing for a moment.

"Oh, don't talk to me!" he said, splashing angrily in the flames. "I
give you advice; take it or leave it--I shan't bother about you anymore.
If you bring the drakling here to me, I'll tell you what to do next. If
not, not."

And the cockatrice drew the fire up close around his shoulders, tucked
himself up in it, and went to sleep.

Now this was exactly the right way to manage Edmund, only no one had
ever thought of trying to do it before.

He stood for a moment looking at the cockatrice; the cockatrice looked
at Edmund out of the corner of his eye and began to snore very loudly,
and Edmund understood, once and for all, that the cockatrice wasn't
going to put up with any nonsense. He respected the cockatrice very much
from that moment, and set off at once to do exactly as he was told--for
perhaps the first time in his life.

Though he had played truant so often, he knew one or two things that
perhaps you don't know, though you have always been so good and gone to
school regularly. For instance, he knew that a drakling is a dragon's
baby, and he felt sure that what he had to do was to find the third of
the three noises that people used to hear coming from the mountains. Of
course, the clucking had been the cockatrice, and the big noise like a
large gentleman asleep after dinner had been the big dragon. So the
smaller rumbling must have been the drakling.

He plunged boldly into the caves and searched and wandered and wandered
and searched, and at last he came to a third door in the mountain, and
on it was written THE BABY IS ASLEEP. Just before the door stood fifty
pairs of copper shoes, and no one could have looked at them for a moment
without seeing what sort of feet they were made for, for each shoe had
five holes in it for the drakling's five claws. And there were fifty
pairs because the drakling took after his mother, and had a hundred
feet--no more and no less. He was the kind called _Draco centipedis_ in
the learned books.

Edmund was a good deal frightened, but he remembered the grim expression
of the cockatrice's eye, and the fixed determination of his snore still
rang in his ears, in spite of the snoring of the drakling, which was, in
itself, considerable. He screwed up his courage, flung the door open,
and called out: "Hello, you drakling. Get out of bed this minute."

The drakling stopped snoring and said sleepily: "It ain't time yet."

"Your mother says you are to, anyhow; and look sharp about it, what's
more," said Edmund, gaining courage from the fact that the drakling had
not yet eaten him.

The drakling sighed, and Edmund could hear it getting out of bed. The
next moment it began to come out of its room and to put on its shoes. It
was not nearly so big as its mother; only about the size of a Baptist
chapel.

"Hurry up," said Edmund, as it fumbled clumsily with the seventeenth
shoe.

"Mother said I was never to go out without my shoes," said the
drakling; so Edmund had to help it to put them on. It took some time,
and was not a comfortable occupation.

At last the drakling said it was ready, and Edmund, who had forgotten to
be frightened, said, "Come on then," and they went back to the
cockatrice.

The cave was rather narrow for the drakling, but it made itself thin, as
you may see a fat worm do when it wants to get through a narrow crack in
a piece of hard earth.

"Here it is," said Edmund, and the cockatrice woke up at once and asked
the drakling very politely to sit down and wait. "Your mother will be
here presently," said the cockatrice, stirring up its fire.

The drakling sat down and waited, but it watched the fire with hungry
eyes.

"I beg your pardon," it said at last, "but I am always accustomed to
having a little basin of fire as soon as I get up, and I feel rather
faint. Might I?"

It reached out a claw toward the cockatrice's basin.

"Certainly not," said the cockatrice sharply. "Where were you brought
up? Did they never teach you that 'we must not ask for all we see'? Eh?"

"I beg your pardon," said the drakling humbly, "but I am really _very_
hungry."

The cockatrice beckoned Edmund to the side of the basin and whispered in
his ear so long and so earnestly that one side of the dear boy's hair
was quite burnt off. And he never once interrupted the cockatrice to ask
why. But when the whispering was over, Edmund--whose heart, as I may
have mentioned, was very tender--said to the drakling: "If you are
really hungry, poor thing, I can show you where there is plenty of
fire." And off he went through the caves, and the drakling followed.

When Edmund came to the proper place he stopped.

There was a round iron thing in the floor, like the ones the men shoot
the coals down into your cellar, only much larger. Edmund heaved it up
by a hook that stuck out at one side, and a rush of hot air came up
that nearly choked him. But the drakling came close and looked down with
one eye and sniffed, and said: "That smells good, eh?"

"Yes," said Edmund, "well, that's the fire in the middle of the earth.
There's plenty of it, all done to a turn. You'd better go down and begin
your breakfast, hadn't you?"

So the drakling wriggled through the hole, and began to crawl faster and
faster down the slanting shaft that leads to the fire in the middle of
the earth. And Edmund, doing exactly as he had been told, for a wonder,
caught the end of the drakling's tail and ran the iron hook through it
so that the drakling was held fast. And it could not turn around and
wriggle up again to look after its poor tail, because, as everyone
knows, the way to the fires below is very easy to go down, but quite
impossible to come back on. There is something about it in Latin,
beginning: "_Facilis descensus_."

So there was the drakling, fast by the silly tail of it, and there was
Edmund very busy and important and very pleased with himself, hurrying
back to the cockatrice.

"Now," said he.

"Well, now," said the cockatrice. "Go to the mouth of the cave and laugh
at the dragon so that she hears you."

Edmund very nearly said "Why?" but he stopped in time, and instead,
said: "She won't hear me--"

"Oh, very well," said the cockatrice. "No doubt you know best," and he
began to tuck himself up again in the fire, so Edmund did as he was bid.

And when he began to laugh his laughter echoed in the mouth of the cave
till it sounded like the laughter of a whole castleful of giants.

And the dragon, lying asleep in the sun, woke up and said very crossly:
"What are you laughing at?"

[Illustration: "That smells good, eh?" _See page 152._]

"At you," said Edmund, and went on laughing. The dragon bore it as long
as she could, but, like everyone else, she couldn't stand being made fun
of, so presently she dragged herself up the mountain very slowly,
because she had just had a rather heavy meal, and stood outside and
said, "What are you laughing at?" in a voice that made Edmund feel as if
he should never laugh again.

Then the good cockatrice called out: "At you! You've eaten your own
drakling--swallowed it with the town. Your own little drakling! He, he,
he! Ha, ha, ha!"

And Edmund found the courage to cry "Ha, ha!" which sounded like
tremendous laughter in the echo of the cave.

"Dear me," said the dragon. "I _thought_ the town stuck in my throat
rather. I must take it out, and look through it more carefully." And
with that she coughed--and choked--and there was the town, on the
hillside.

Edmund had run back to the cockatrice, and it had told him what to do.
So before the dragon had time to look through the town again for her
drakling, the voice of the drakling itself was heard howling miserably
from inside the mountain, because Edmund was pinching its tail as hard
as he could in the round iron door, like the one where the men pour the
coals out of the sacks into the cellar. And the dragon heard the voice
and said: "Why, whatever's the matter with Baby? He's not here!" and
made herself thin, and crept into the mountain to find her drakling. The
cockatrice kept on laughing as loud as it could, and Edmund kept on
pinching, and presently the great dragon--very long and narrow she had
made herself--found her head where the round hole was with the iron lid.
Her tail was a mile or two off--outside the mountain. When Edmund heard
her coming he gave one last nip to the drakling's tail, and then heaved
up the lid and stood behind it, so that the dragon could not see him.
Then he loosed the drakling's tail from the hook, and the dragon peeped
down the hole just in time to see her drakling's tail disappear down the
smooth, slanting shaft with one last squeak of pain. Whatever may have
been the poor dragon's other faults, she was an excellent mother. She
plunged headfirst into the hole, and slid down the shaft after her baby.
Edmund watched her head go--and then the rest of her. She was so long,
now she had stretched herself thin, that it took all night. It was like
watching a goods train go by in Germany. When the last joint of her tail
had gone Edmund slammed down the iron door. He was a kindhearted boy, as
you have guessed, and he was glad to think that dragon and drakling
would now have plenty to eat of their favorite food, forever and ever.
He thanked the cockatrice for his kindness, and got home just in time to
have breakfast and get to school by nine. Of course, he could not have
done this if the town had been in its old place by the river in the
middle of the plain, but it had taken root on the hillside just where
the dragon left it.

"Well," said the master, "where were you yesterday?"

Edmund explained, and the master at once caned him for not speaking the
truth.

"But it _is_ true," said Edmund. "Why, the whole town was swallowed by
the dragon. You know it was--"

"Nonsense," said the master. "There was a thunderstorm and an
earthquake, that's all." And he caned Edmund more than ever.

"But," said Edmund, who always would argue, even in the least favorable
circumstances, "how do you account for the town being on the hillside
now, instead of by the river as it used to be?"

"It was _always_ on the hillside," said the master. And all the class
said the same, for they had more sense than to argue with a person who
carried a cane.

"But look at the maps," said Edmund, who wasn't going to be beaten in
argument, whatever he might be in the flesh. The master pointed to the
map on the wall.

There was the town, on the hillside! And nobody but Edmund could see
that of course the shock of being swallowed by the dragon had upset all
the maps and put them wrong.

And then the master caned Edmund again, explaining that this time it was
not for untruthfulness, but for his vexatious argumentative habits. This
will show you what a prejudiced and ignorant man Edmund's master
was--how different from the revered Head of the nice school where your
good parents are kind enough to send you.

The next day Edmund thought he would prove his tale by showing people
the cockatrice, and he actually persuaded some people to go into the
cave with him; but the cockatrice had bolted himself in and would not
open the door--so Edmund got nothing by that except a scolding for
taking people on a wild-goose chase.

"A wild goose," said they, "is nothing like a cockatrice."

And poor Edmund could not say a word, though he knew how wrong they
were. The only person who believed him was his granny. But then she was
very old and very kind, and had always said he was the best of boys.

Only one good thing came of all this long story. Edmund has never been
quite the same boy since. He does not argue quite so much, and he agreed
to be apprenticed to a locksmith, so that he might one day be able to
pick the lock of the cockatrice's front door--and learn some more of the
things that other people don't know.

But he is quite an old man now, and he hasn't gotten that door open
yet!
